QuadChroma - manual
===================

QuadChroma is one app per platform - QuadChroma.app on the Mac,
quadchroma.exe on Windows - and every copy is client and host at once.
Run it on every computer you use: each one sits in the menu bar or the
notification area, lets the other computers in ("Share this Mac" /
"Share this PC", on by default, switchable off) and lists every other
QuadChroma computer in the network. From whichever computer you sit at,
open the window and click any other one in the list; during a session
the menu's "Computers" tab switches to another computer directly. There
are no separate host and client programs and no second process for
sharing. Each computer has one device ID and one name (the computer's
name until changed with "Change device name ..."), the same in both
directions; "Prevent sleep while QuadChroma is running" keeps it
reachable. The Mac app needs no FFmpeg; the Windows download carries the
two FFmpeg DLLs. Most examples below show a Windows PC connecting to a
Mac, the main use; every other pairing works the same way. Texts of the
program are quoted in their English wording; this manual is plain ASCII
and writes "-" where the program shows an en dash or a middle dot.

Starting (Windows):

    quadchroma.exe

The app requires administrator rights (see "Windows: one app for both
directions"): Windows asks via UAC at every start by hand (confirm with
"Yes"), also on a PC that only controls others. Only "Start with
Windows" starts it at logon without asking. On a standard account every
start needs an administrator's user name and password, and "Start with
Windows" is not available. All command-line switches in this manual
need, on Windows, a terminal started as administrator ("Run as
administrator"): from a normal terminal Windows refuses the start ("The
requested operation requires elevation") or opens the app elevated in a
new process whose output does not reach that terminal.

Without an address the start screen opens. The Mac announces itself on
the network, so it appears in the list after a few seconds; a click is
enough. If you know the address, you can also type it in or pass it
directly:

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001

Port 9001 carries video and audio (and everything from host to client),
9002 input and the clipboard including files (everything from client to
host), 9003 the network announcement. On the first start the Windows
Firewall asks whether the program may access the network - this must be
allowed, otherwise the list stays empty.

Each host in the list shows its name and its device ID, a small check
mark once the client knows it; hovering over the row shows its address.
The list holds every QuadChroma computer that announces itself, except
this one: known ones first, then by name (case does not matter), each
computer once even when it is heard under several addresses (the one in
hosts.txt wins, otherwise the one heard first), and the rows keep their
order while others come and go. A computer that has not been heard for
10 s leaves the list. Four rows are visible; the mouse wheel over the
list scrolls the rest one row per notch, a trackpad by the distance the
fingers travel (a scroll bar appears on the right).
The address field also takes a device ID (nine digits, spaces or
hyphens allowed) and pastes with Ctrl+V. The first time this PC
connects to a host, the host wants its access password or a click on
"Allow" there - see "Encryption and access".

First start of a downloaded release: QuadChroma is not signed with a
paid certificate. Simplest is to do this before unpacking: right-click
the ZIP, Properties, tick "Unblock", OK - that avoids the SmartScreen
warning. Otherwise SmartScreen reports "Windows protected your PC":
"More info", then "Run anyway". Either way the UAC prompt comes at every
start by hand, with "Unknown publisher" while the exe is not code-signed.
avcodec-63.dll and avutil-61.dll stay next to quadchroma.exe. The
checksums of the files are in SHA256SUMS.txt on the release page.
"Start with Windows" installs the app into C:\Program Files\QuadChroma
and starts it from there at every logon (see "Windows: one app for both
directions").

No access before sign-in: after a restart or a logout a computer is
reachable only once a user has signed in on it, because QuadChroma
starts at login ("Start with Windows", "Start at login" on the Mac), not
as a system service before it. The login screen and the UAC consent
prompt on Windows' secure desktop cannot be controlled from another
computer; someone at the PC has to answer them.

Closing does not quit QuadChroma; it hides the app in the notification
area (on the Mac, in the menu bar). Only one app with a window runs at
a time: a second start hands its address over to it. The desktop
shortcut per host relies on this. All three are described further
below, as is copying files between client and host.

On Windows and on the Mac QuadChroma is one app for both directions: it
controls other computers and, with "Share this PC" ("Share this Mac")
switched on (the default), lets other devices control this computer - in
the same process, with one icon in the notification area or the menu
bar. The very first start opens the window; every later start goes
silently to the icon, and a start at logon always does - even on a
computer whose window was never shown; a double-click on the running app
opens its window (see "Windows: one app for both directions" and "Mac:
one app for both directions"). Closing the window, its "Close window"
button and ESC on the start screen only hide it; quitting is in the
icon's menu.

Encryption and access
---------------------

The connection is always encrypted; there is no switch for it. On their
first start both sides create their own permanent key and recognize each
other by it from then on.

Device ID: every device has a fixed nine-digit ID derived from its key,
written in groups of three, such as "581 729 911". It is there for
people and for searching - the host's menu, the client's host list and
the access windows show it; trust always goes to the full key behind it.
A computer has one key and therefore one ID: host.key is the device key
of the whole app - the host role accepts connections with it, and the
client calls other computers with it. So the ID in "This computer" on
the start screen, in the announcement and in another computer's list of
allowed devices is always the same.

Migration from versions before the one app: those called with a second
key, client.key. It stays on disk, unused and unchanged (it is never
deleted or rewritten). A computer that knew this one only by that former
key does not recognize the device key and asks once more for its
password or "Allow"; when the client knows that host and a different
client.key is still there, its access dialog adds "QuadChroma now uses
one key per computer for both directions. If <name> knew this computer
before, it asks once more." (log: "Zugang: <Name> ist hier gemerkt und
fragt trotzdem - dieser Rechner ruft jetzt mit seinem
Geraeteschluessel (host.key) an, nicht mehr mit client.key; einmal
Passwort oder Zulassen, dann gilt der neue"). Afterwards the host lists
the device under its device key; an entry for the former key can be
removed in its "Allowed devices".

Who gets in: every host keeps a list of allowed devices, and a device on
it comes straight in. A new device has two ways in:

    Password    Its user types the host's access password, which the
                host shows in its menu (menu bar on the Mac,
                notification area on Windows).
    Allow       Someone at the host clicks "Allow" in the window that
                appears there.

Either way the host adds the device to its list, and the next connection
needs neither. There are no command-line switches for this; a host that
is started with the former switches --pair or --forget only notes them
in its log as unknown arguments.

The access password: at its first start the host makes up a random one,
nine characters in three groups such as "k7m-4wq-9tz" (lower-case
letters and digits without i, l, o, 0 and 1). The host's menu shows it,
and a click on it copies it, marked as concealed, so that clipboard
histories and QuadChroma's own clipboard transfer leave it alone.
"Change password ..." sets your own, "New random password" makes a new
random one. An own password needs at least 8 characters that are not
spaces, tabs, line breaks or hyphens, and at most 128 bytes in one line.
Spaces, tabs, line breaks and hyphens do not count when comparing, and
A-Z count as a-z: "K7M 4WQ-9TZ" is the same password as "k7m-4wq-9tz".
Nothing else is changed (no other letters are lowered, no Unicode
normalization). A new password removes no allowed device. Both hosts
read the file on every check, so a password written into it by hand
applies at once.

First contact works in both directions: a client that does not know
the host's key yet (not in hosts.txt - the first connection, or after
hosts.txt was deleted) asks the host to prove itself. Then even a host
that knows the device goes through the same step - password or "Allow"
- and the host's answer to the password proves it to the client. A host
that simply says "known" instead is refused (see the messages below);
the client remembers nothing.

The access dialog (client): when the host does not know this device,
or the client does not know the host, the client opens a dialog over
the waiting screen (the program writes
typographic dashes and ellipses where this manual writes "-" and
"..."):

    Password for <name>
    <name> does not know this device yet. Enter the password shown in
    the QuadChroma menu on <name>.
    Or ask someone at <name> to click "Allow".     (only if possible)
    Code: 628 306                                  (likewise)
    Password [ .......... ] [Show]
    [Connect] [Cancel]

The field shows dots; "Show" reveals the text and then reads "Hide".
Typing, Ctrl+V (Cmd+V on the Mac), the arrow keys, Home, End, Backspace
and Del work as usual, at most 128 bytes; Enter means "Connect", Esc
"Cancel". While the dialog is open, no key goes to the host. Below the
field it says "Checking ..." while the host checks, "Wrong password."
after a wrong one, and "Too many attempts. Try again in N s." while the
host's throttle runs - "Connect" is disabled until the seconds have
counted down. "Cancel" goes back to the start screen. The client sends a
proof only after you have typed a password, never by itself; a click on
"Allow" at the host lets it in without one. If another key was
remembered for this address before, the dialog adds "The device at this
address has a new identity (ID ...)." (see "Remembered hosts" below).

The password never crosses the network, not even encrypted: the client
derives a key from it and from the host's public key and sends a proof
that is valid for this one connection only; the host answers with a
proof of its own. The client checks that one before it remembers the
host. If it does not match, the client stops with "<name> could not
confirm the password. The connection was stopped for safety." and
remembers nothing: whoever answered did not know the password.

Comparison code: the handshake yields a six-digit code such as
"628 306"; both sides compute the same one unless someone sits in
between. It stands in the host's Allow window and, when "Allow" is
possible, in the client's access dialog; the client also shows it on
the waiting screen, with F9 and in the "Encryption" tab of the menu.
Whoever clicks "Allow" should compare it with the code on the client
first. With the password it is not needed: the two proofs already show
that both sides know it.

The Allow window (host): "<name> (ID 123 456 789) wants to control this
computer.", below it "Code: 628 306" and the buttons "Allow" and "Deny".
It floats above other windows and plays a sound, but it does not take
the keyboard: click into it first, then Return means "Allow". So that a
click meant for another window lets nobody in, "Allow" is disabled for
the first second; "Deny" works at once, and so do Esc and, on Windows,
the close box. One window at a time; further requests wait for it. If
the client cancels, disconnects or the 120 s of the access phase run
out, the window closes by itself. <name> is what the client calls
itself; nobody checks it. The ID next to it comes from the client's key,
and a name with nine or more digits, which could pass for an ID, is
replaced by the client's IP address.

Messages on the client's start screen, in amber. None of them is
retried automatically - connect again yourself:

    "<name> refused the connection."
                    someone clicked "Deny" at the host
    "Too many attempts. Please wait a moment and try again."
                    five wrong passwords in one connection, the
                    throttle, or no free place for another access phase
    "No answer from <name>. Please try again."
                    nobody decided within the 120 s, the host closed the
                    connection during the access phase, or it said
                    nothing for 10 s after the handshake
    "<name> uses an older QuadChroma version. Please update it there."
                    the host closed the connection right after the
                    handshake, as older versions do with an unknown
                    device (on a reconnect after an accepted session
                    this counts as a lost connection and is retried)
    "<name> could not confirm the password. The connection was stopped
     for safety."   the host's proof was wrong (see above)
    "<name> did not prove its identity. The connection was stopped for
     safety."       the client did not know the host's key and asked it
                    to prove itself, but the host let it in at once
                    ("QCH1") without the password step or "Allow" -
                    it may not be the host it claims to be
    "A different device answers at this address."
                    connecting by ID, the host's key does not give that
                    ID, or it is not the key remembered for it
    "No device with ID <ID> found in the network."
                    an ID that neither announces itself nor is in
                    hosts.txt
    "<name> no longer knows this device. Connect again and enter the
     password."     after a session, the host asked for access again on
                    the automatic reconnect (the device was removed
                    there); the client withdraws at once instead of
                    raising an Allow window nobody asked for
    "The other side speaks a different protocol"
                    the host answered with something other than "QCH1"
                    or "QCA1", or broke the rules of the access phase

Remembered hosts (client): only after a host has let the client in -
after "QCH1", see the wire format below - the client writes it into
hosts.txt: ID, key, the address it was reached at, and its name. A
remembered host has a small check mark in the host list and is
recognized by its key at any address. Connecting by ID - a row of the
host list, a desktop shortcut, or nine digits in the address field -
the client checks right after the host's second handshake message,
before it identifies itself, that the host's key gives this ID and, if
a key is remembered for the ID, that it is exactly that key; otherwise
it stops with "A different device answers at this address.". A host
that announces its ID from a new address is followed there ("Ziel ID
<ID> meldet sich jetzt unter <neu> (vorher <alt>)", the target now
answers at a new address). Connecting by address or name alone, an
unknown key there is a new host: the access dialog comes (with the note
about a new identity if another key was remembered for that address),
and after acceptance the new entry stands for the address while the old
one stays for its ID. This holds even if the host at the address
already knows this client: to a key it does not know the client always
sets bit 0 in handshake message 3, so the host has to prove itself
(password or "Allow"); a host that answers "QCH1" at once is refused
with "<name> did not prove its identity. ...", and nothing is
remembered. A changed key is no longer an error you have to clear by
hand. The settings per host (see "The menu") stay tied
to the host's fingerprint.

Allowed devices (host): the host's menu lists them under "Allowed
devices" as "<name> - ID 581 729 911 - since <date>", each with a
"Remove" entry; "Remove all devices ..." asks first ("Remove all allowed
devices? They will need the password again."). An empty list shows "No
devices yet". A removed device that is connected right now is
disconnected, also when it is just coming in; next time it needs the
password or "Allow" again.

Throttle, the same on both hosts: counted per address and per client
key, the larger value applies. The first two wrong passwords cost
nothing, the third 5 s, then the wait doubles up to 300 s; a correct
proof resets both counters, and a counter expires 15 min after its last
failure. More than 30 failures within 60 s from all senders together:
every new access phase, and every further failure, waits at least 60 s.
A proof that comes before the wait is over counts as a failure and is
not even checked. Five failures in one connection end it (result 4). At
most 4 access phases run at a time, 1 per client key and 2 per address;
anyone beyond that gets "QCA1" and at once result 4 with 5000 ms. A
phase lasts at most 120 s, and every message of the client must arrive
complete within 10 s - trickling bytes does not keep a phase open.
While a device waits in the access phase, nothing else is held up: no
global lock, a running viewer is not disturbed, and the waiting device
gets no input channel.

One viewer at a time: if a second allowed device connects, it takes
over the session. The previous one receives message 10 from the host,
shows "Another device has taken over the session." on the start screen
and does not reconnect by itself; "Connect" brings the session back.
Older clients do not know this message, reconnect after 2 s and take the
session back from the new viewer. On the switch the host immediately
cuts the old viewer's input channel and releases its pressed keys and
mouse buttons. The Mac host's log shows "Bisheriger Zuschauer
<Fingerabdruck> abgeloest und getrennt" (previous viewer replaced and
disconnected; if the old one hangs, " - die Abloese-Nachricht kam nicht
an" is appended: the takeover message did not arrive), and the old
client's log shows "Sitzung mit <Adresse> von einem anderen Geraet
uebernommen (Host meldet Abloesung) - keine automatische Neuverbindung"
(session taken over by another device, no automatic reconnect). The new
viewer inherits nothing from the old one: a test pattern ends ("Testbild
aus (neuer Zuschauer)"), and the host sends it a keyframe right away,
even when the screen is still. A peer that disappears without saying
goodbye (lid closed, Wi-Fi gone) is noticed by the Mac host after about
16 s.

The host says goodbye: before it closes the connection on purpose, the
viewer gets message 13 with a reason as the last message on the video
channel, and the client ends the session at once, goes back to the start
screen and shows the reason there until the next connection - without
reconnecting by itself (like message 10):

    0  "QuadChroma was closed on <Name>."
                                   the host app was quit (Mac: "Quit
                                   QuadChroma", Cmd+Q, logging out,
                                   SIGTERM/SIGINT; Windows: "Quit" in the
                                   icon's menu, logging off, shutting
                                   down, an installer closing it,
                                   WM_CLOSE from another program)
    1  "<Name> stopped sharing."   "Share this PC" / "Share this Mac"
                                   switched off (icon menu or start
                                   screen), or "Stop sharing" of the
                                   host-only process (--nur-host)
    2  "<Name> removed this device."  this device was removed from the
                                   host's list of allowed devices during
                                   the session ("Remove", "Remove all
                                   devices ...")

<Name> is the host's name from its announcement or hosts.txt (otherwise
the address). The client's log shows "Sitzung mit <Name> (<Adresse>) zu
Ende: der Host wurde beendet (Abschied, Grund 0) - keine automatische
Neuverbindung" ("... hat die Freigabe ausgeschaltet", "... hat dieses
Geraet entfernt"); an unknown reason counts as 0. Older clients ignore
message 13 and only see the connection end.

Without a goodbye - host crashed, network gone, lid closed - the client
retries for at most about 30 s in total (every 2 s); then it gives up,
goes back to the start screen and shows "Connection lost" ("Verbindung
zu <Adresse>: seit N s keine Verbindung - aufgegeben, kein neuer
Versuch"). The same limit applies when the very first connection does
not come about: after about 30 s the start screen shows the last error.

    13  Goodbye       Host -> client, video channel: u8 reason (0 app
                      quit, 1 sharing switched off, 2 device removed; at
                      least 1 byte, further bytes are ignored). The last
                      message, the host closes the video and input
                      channel right after it.

No connection to itself: a host running on the same computer also
announces itself to the local client. The client knows this computer's
ID from host.key, the one device key of both roles (for this check it
only reads the file; the file itself is created by whichever role needs
it first - the host role when it starts, or the client at its first
connection), and leaves that ID out of the list of found hosts and out
of the menu of its icon. Typing that ID
gives "This is this computer."; so does connecting to an address where
this computer's own host answers - the client stops right after message
2 of the handshake, before message 3 would show its own key, and does
not try again ("An <Adresse> antwortet dieser Rechner selbst (Schluessel
= eigener host.key) - Abbruch vor Nachricht 3, kein Verbinden zu sich
selbst"). Both hosts turn away a device that shows their own key, even
when it is in the list: "QCA1" and at once result 3, as after "Deny"
("Abgewiesen: <IP> meldet sich mit dem eigenen Schluessel dieses Hosts
- Verbindung zu sich selbst", on Windows with the name in front of the
address; rate-limited like the other lines of unknown devices). Because
a computer calls with its device key, two computers whose QuadChroma
folder was copied from one to the other (a cloned virtual machine, a
restored backup) share host.key and count as one device: they hide each
other and cannot connect. Delete host.key on one of them while the app
is not running; it gets a new key and ID at its next start.

Handshake: each handshake has an overall deadline (host 5 s, client 3 s)
and runs in its own thread on the host, so a peer that stays silent or
trickles data only holds its own slot. There are 32 slots per port. The
Mac host allows 4 per address and, when the slots are full, drops the
oldest running handshake ("Bildkanal: Andrang - ...", video channel
crowded); the Windows host allows 2 per sender and rejects anything
beyond that ("Bildkanal: Verbindung von <IP> abgewiesen - schon N
Handschlaege offen ..."). On the input channel (9002) the client checks,
still during the handshake, that the same host answers as on the video
channel; otherwise not a single key goes out (log: "Eingabekanal:
Gegenstelle <Fingerabdruck> ist nicht der Host des Bildkanals - vor
Nachricht 3 abgebrochen", at most every 10 s). The host accepts an
input channel only for the viewer whose video channel it has let in.
The input channel is set up in the background; its first message always
states what the client can do (capabilities, see "Files via the
clipboard"). Settings, codec, test pattern and clipboard changes that
come before that are sent by the client afterwards (the latest of each
kind); mouse movements and keys are not. The stored values of a host
(see "The menu") apply from the video channel on (so a stored "Sound"
set to off takes effect at once); the client sends them to the host as
soon as the input channel is up.

Host logs: lines that anyone on the network can trigger without being
allowed (failed handshake, the access phase of an unknown device -
access needed, wrong password, cancelled, deadline, no free place -, a
damaged device list, input channel without video, on the Windows host
also full handshake slots and the Allow window) are rate-limited: the
first one immediately, after that at most one of the same kind and
address every 10 s. Both hosts count per kind and address (the Mac host
four addresses per kind, the Windows host 64, any further ones
together) and append the count to the line ("<Zeile> - dazu N weitere
von dieser Adresse seit der letzten Meldung", i.e. N more from this
address since the last report); counts not followed by another line
appear after the interval as a summary line ("<Art>: N weitere von <IP>
seit der letzten Meldung" or "<Art>: N weitere von anderen Adressen seit
der letzten Meldung, zuletzt von <IP>", where <Art> is the kind of
line), on the Windows host at the latest 15 s after the last line let
through. The rate-limited lines name the address, including those of
the input channel ("Eingabekanal abgewiesen: kein Bildkanal offen
(<IP>)", input rejected because no video channel is open). What happens
only after the password or a click - accepted, allowed, denied, entered
into the list - and "Zuschauer verbunden" (viewer connected) always
appear. Neither host ever writes the password into its log.

Both hosts limit their log to 8 MB. The Mac host (in the one app
host-protokoll.txt in the app folder, the stand-alone host
/tmp/quadchroma-m1.log) then moves it to host-protokoll.alt.txt (or
/tmp/quadchroma-m1.alt.log; an earlier one is dropped) and writes as the
first new line "Protokoll war ueber 8192 KB - die Zeilen davor stehen in
<.alt-Datei>"; if the file
cannot be renamed, it starts empty ("... - die Zeilen davor sind
verworfen", the earlier lines are discarded). The file grows across
restarts; the few lines that audio and clipboard write into it
themselves are not counted. The Windows host starts host-protokoll.txt
anew at every start and moves it to host-protokoll.alt.txt at 8 MB
("Protokoll ueber 8 MB - der vorige Teil steht in
host-protokoll.alt.txt"), and likewise messung.txt to messung.alt.txt.

Where the files are: the names of the host's files begin with "host",
because host and client of the one app share the folder:

    Mac       ~/Library/Application Support/QuadChroma/
    Windows   %APPDATA%\QuadChroma\
              host.key (the device key, both roles),
              host-devices.txt, host-password.txt (host role),
              hosts.txt (client); a client.key of an earlier
              version lies there unused

    host-devices.txt   the allowed devices, one line each: 64 hex digits
                       of the key, two spaces, the date it was added
                       (YYYY-MM-DD), two spaces, the name (at most 40
                       bytes). Blank lines and lines starting with # are
                       allowed.
    host-password.txt  the access password, one line, in plain text -
                       the host has to be able to show it.
    hosts.txt          the client's remembered hosts, newest first, one
                       line each: ID (9 digits), 64 hex digits of the
                       key, the last address (ip:port) and the name.
                       Lines the client does not understand stay in the
                       file.

All three are written completely into a temporary file first and then
renamed into place; on the Mac they are for the owner only (0600).

Taking over the old lists (once, at the first start of this version):
if authorized.txt exists and host-devices.txt does not, the host takes
over every valid entry of authorized.txt (date today, name as before,
usually the IP address) and renames the old file to
authorized.txt.migriert. Likewise the client with known_hosts.txt: each
key once, ID from the key, address "<host>:9001" (an IPv6 address in
brackets), the old host as the name; the old file becomes
known_hosts.txt.migriert. A host no longer takes in the first device by
itself, not even with an empty or missing list.

Broken files never let anyone in and are never replaced silently. A key
is created only when its file is missing - by whichever role needs it
first; an existing key file is never written again. The Mac host engine
writes host.key with 32 bytes (the private key only), the Rust part (the
client, and on Windows the host role) with 64 (private, then public).
Both read both forms: from 32 bytes the public key is computed - the same
public key and ID on both sides -, and both take 64 bytes only when the
second half is the public key of the first. If both roles create the
missing file at the same moment (the client and the host engine in the
one Mac app, say), the one that comes second reads the other's file
instead of writing its own. If host.key exists but is unreadable or in
neither form (neither 32 nor 64 bytes, or 64 bytes with a mismatching
public half), it stays as it is and the host does not start
("Schluessel host.key ist vorhanden, aber nicht lesbar oder beschaedigt
- Abbruch. ..." or on Windows "Schluessel konnte nicht angelegt werden -
Abbruch: ..."). Deleting a key file
gives the device a new identity and a new ID. After a new host.key the
host still knows its allowed devices, but they do not know its new key:
each of them asks it to prove itself and needs the password (or
"Allow") once more; a client that connects by the old ID (a desktop
shortcut, say) stops with "A different device answers at this address."
- pick the host from the list, which shows its new ID, and create
shortcuts anew. Since the client calls with the same host.key, a new
host.key also makes this computer new to every host it connects to:
each asks once for its password or "Allow".

The client reads host.key and hosts.txt before it opens a connection:

    unreadable     (locked by a virus scanner or backup, permissions,
                   or hosts.txt larger than 1 MiB): no connection to the
                   host. The client retries every 2 s for at most about
                   30 s, writes this to the log once and connects by
                   itself as soon as the file is readable.
    damaged        (host.key has the wrong length or a public half
                   that does not match, or cannot be written,
                   hosts.txt is not UTF-8, e.g. ANSI): the
                   client does not try again ("Verbindung zu <Adresse>
                   beendet: der Fehler bleibt bis zur Behebung - kein
                   neuer Versuch"). After fixing the problem, reconnect
                   yourself.

UTF-8 with BOM works for hosts.txt. If hosts.txt cannot be written after
an accepted connection, the session runs anyway and the host is simply
not remembered ("hosts.txt: <Name> nicht gemerkt - <Grund>").

On the hosts, an unreadable or damaged host-devices.txt (a line that is
not an entry, a comment or blank, or more than 1 MiB; on Windows also
not UTF-8) means: nobody counts as known, every device needs the
password or "Allow", and the file stays as it is. The menu shows "Device
list damaged" and "Reset device list"; resetting moves the file aside as
host-devices.txt.defekt-<YYYYMMDD-hhmmss> and starts an empty list. A
device let in while the list is damaged gets this session only. An
unreadable or invalid host-password.txt (empty, fewer than 8 counted
characters, more than one line, over 128 bytes; on Windows also control
characters such as a tab) means no password: new devices get in only
through "Allow". The menu shows "Password file unreadable - new devices
only via "Allow"." instead of the password, and "New random password"
writes a new file. A proof that arrives meanwhile is answered with
result 2 without a wait: the fault lies with the host, so it does not
feed the throttle.

Log lines of the access phase in the Mac host (host-protokoll.txt);
<Name> is the client's name, <ID> its device ID, <IP> its address:

    "Geraete-ID dieses Hosts: <ID> (Fingerabdruck <Fingerabdruck>)
     erlaubte Geraete: N"                                    (at start)
    "Zugang noetig: <Name> (ID <ID>) von <IP> - Passwort oder Zulassen"
     (" - Passwort" when nobody can click "Allow"; plus ", Drossel N s"
     while the throttle runs; for a known device with bit 0 "... von
     <IP> - bekannt, kennt diesen Host aber nicht (Bit 0 in Nachricht
     3), der Host weist sich aus - Passwort ...")
    "Zugang: <Name> (ID <ID>, <IP>) mit Passwort angenommen und
     eingetragen" or "... am Host zugelassen und eingetragen" (for a
     known device "... und war schon eingetragen (Host auf Wunsch des
     Clients ausgewiesen)"; its entry stays as it was)
    "Zugang: <Name> (ID <ID>, <IP>) am Host abgelehnt"
    "Zugang: Passwort falsch fuer <Name> (ID <ID>, <IP>), Fehlversuch N
     in dieser Verbindung - Drossel S s" (with "Beweis vor Ablauf der
     Wartezeit" for a proof that came too early; after the fifth
     ", zu viele Versuche - geschlossen")
    "Zugang: Frist fuer <Name> (ID <ID>, <IP>) abgelaufen - geschlossen"
    "Zugang: <Name> (ID <ID>, <IP>) hat abgebrochen" or "... hat die
     Verbindung beendet"
    "Zugang: kein Platz fuer <Name> (ID <ID>, <IP>) - zu viele
     Zugangsphasen, geschlossen"
    "Zuschauer verbunden: <Name> (ID <ID>) <IP>:<Port>, verschluesselt,
     Gegenstelle <Fingerabdruck>, Vergleichscode <Code>"
    "Geraet entfernt: <Name> (ID <ID>)", "Alle Geraete entfernt (N)",
     "Zuschauer getrennt: sein Geraet wurde aus der Liste entfernt"
     (the viewer got the goodbye with reason 2 first; " - der Abschied
     kam nicht an" is appended if it did not take it within 100 ms)
    "Geraeteliste host-devices.txt nicht lesbar oder beschaedigt -
     niemand gilt als bekannt, jedes Geraet braucht Passwort oder
     Zulassen; die Datei bleibt unangetastet"
    "Zugangspasswort neu erzeugt (host-password.txt; es steht im Menue)",
     "Zugangspasswort geaendert", "Zugangspasswort geaendert (neues
     Zufallspasswort)"
    "Migration: N Geraet(e) aus authorized.txt in host-devices.txt
     uebernommen, die alte Liste heisst jetzt authorized.txt.migriert"

Log lines of the Windows host role (host-protokoll.txt), where <wer> is
"<Name> (<IP>), ID <ID>":

    "Geraete-ID dieses Hosts: <ID>   Name: <Rechnername>   Fingerabdruck:
     <Fingerabdruck>   erlaubte Geraete: N"                  (at start)
    "Zugang noetig: <wer> ist unbekannt - Passwort oder "Zulassen" am
     Host, Wartezeit N ms" (without the icon: "... - Passwort (kein
     "Zulassen": keine Oberflaeche), ..."; a known device with bit 0:
     "<wer> ist bekannt, kennt diesen Host aber nicht (Bit 0 in
     Nachricht 3) - der Host weist sich aus - Passwort ...", and after
     acceptance "Geraet <Name>, ID <ID> stand schon in der Liste")
    "Zugang: <wer> - Passwort richtig", "Zugang: <wer> am Host
     zugelassen", then "Geraet eingetragen: <Name>, ID <ID>"
    "Zugang: <wer> am Host abgelehnt"
    "Zugang: <wer> - Passwort falsch (Fehlversuch N), naechster Versuch
     fruehestens in M ms"
    "Zugang: <wer> - N Fehlversuche in dieser Verbindung, getrennt
     (naechster Versuch fruehestens in M ms)"
    "Zugang: <wer> - Frist von 120 s abgelaufen, getrennt", "Zugang:
     <wer> hat abgebrochen", "Zugang: <wer> hat die Leitung geschlossen"
    "Zugang: kein Platz fuer <wer> - schon zu viele Zugangsphasen (je
     Geraet eine, je Adresse zwei, zusammen 4), abgewiesen"
    "Zuschauer verbunden: <Name> (<IP>:<Port>), ID <ID>, verschluesselt,
     Gegenstelle <Fingerabdruck>, Vergleichscode <Code>" (plus " - eben
     per Passwort erlaubt" or " - eben am Host zugelassen")
    "Geraet entfernt: ID <ID>", "Alle Geraete entfernt"
    "Zuschauer <Name> (<IP>) wird verabschiedet: <Grund>" with <Grund>
     "Geraet entfernt", "Freigabe beendet" or "Host-Rolle beendet", then
     "Abschied (<Grund>) an <IP> gemeldet" or "... nicht zugestellt:
     <Fehler>" (see "The host says goodbye")
    "Zuschauerplatz geschlossen: Port 9001 und 9002 zu, Bekanntgabe aus"
     (when sharing ends or the host role is ended: first the ports close
     and the announcement stops, then the viewer gets the goodbye)
    "Zuschauer <Name> (<IP>) abgewiesen: die Freigabe endete waehrend des
     Handschlags"
    "Zugangspasswort: neues Zufallspasswort angelegt (host-password.txt)"
    "Uebernahme: N Geraete aus authorized.txt nach host-devices.txt, alte
     Liste heisst jetzt authorized.txt.migriert"

Log lines of the client (protokoll.txt):

    "Zugang noetig: <Name> (<Adresse>, ID <ID>, Vergleichscode <Code>)
     kennt dieses Geraet noch nicht - Passwort oder Zulassen am Host"
     (or "- nur Passwort"; if the client does not know the host's key:
     "... ist hier noch nicht gemerkt (Bit 0 in Nachricht 3: der Host
     weist sich aus) - ...")
    "<Adresse>: <Name> (ID <ID>, Fingerabdruck <Fingerabdruck>)
     antwortet mit QCH1, obwohl dieser Client seinen Schluessel nicht
     kennt (Bit 0 in Nachricht 3) - der Host hat sich nicht ausgewiesen
     ..."           (the host did not prove itself; nothing remembered)
    "Zugang: Passwort falsch (N. Mal)"
    "Zugang: <Name> hat dieses Geraet angenommen (Passwort, Beweis des
     Hosts stimmt)" or "(Zulassen am Host)"
    "Zugang: vom Nutzer abgebrochen (<Name>)"
    "hosts.txt: <Name> (ID <ID>) unter <Adresse> gemerkt"
    "hosts.txt: N bekannte Hosts aus known_hosts.txt uebernommen - die
     alte Datei heisst jetzt known_hosts.txt.migriert"
    "An <Adresse> antwortet ein anderes Geraet (ID <ID> statt der
     gewaehlten <ID>) - Abbruch vor Nachricht 3"

Wire format of the access (header as everywhere: u8 type, u8 flags 0,
u16 0, u32 length; numbers little endian unless noted):

    Handshake message 3 (client -> host) carries "QCN1", u8 n, n bytes
    of UTF-8, the client's name (1 to 40 bytes), and u8 flags. Bit 0:
    the client does not know the host's key (it is not in hosts.txt) -
    "prove yourself"; bits 1 to 7 are 0. Older clients send "QCN1"
    without the flags byte, which counts as flags 0, or just "client";
    for "client" and for a broken payload the host shows the client's
    IP address instead of a name. Hosts ignore further bytes. The
    client decides on bit 0 after message 2, when it has the host's key.

    After the handshake the host sends 4 bytes on the video channel:
    "QCH1" - the device is known, the session starts as before - or
    "QCA1" - the access phase follows. With bit 0 set the host always
    sends "QCA1", even for a device in its list (whose entry then stays
    as it is); a client that set bit 0 and gets "QCH1" at once stops
    ("<name> did not prove its identity. ...") and remembers nothing.
    When the device is accepted, "QCH1" follows and then everything as
    before.

    20  Access needed Host -> client, length 8 + n: u8 version (1), u8
                      ways (bit 0 password, always set; bit 1 "Allow"
                      possible, the host's menu is running), u16 0,
                      u32 wait in ms (no proof before that; 0 = at
                      once), then n (at most 40) bytes of UTF-8, the
                      host's name.
    21  Proof         Client -> host, length 32: client_proof.
    22  Result        Host -> client, length 8, or 40 with result 0: u8
                      result, u8 0, u16 0, u32 wait in ms, and with
                      result 0 the 32 bytes of host_proof. Results:
                      0 accepted by password, 1 accepted by "Allow",
                      2 wrong password (try again after the wait),
                      3 denied, 4 too many attempts, deadline or no
                      free place (the host closes the connection).
    23  Cancel        Client -> host, length 0: the user cancelled.

    Without a free place the host sends "QCA1" and at once 22 with
    result 4 and 5000 ms, without 20. The client accepts 22 with
    result 3 or 4 in place of 20. It accepts result 1 only if 20 set
    bit 1, and result 0 only with a correct host_proof.

    norm(pw)      the UTF-8 bytes as typed, without space, tab, CR, LF
                  and "-", A-Z turned into a-z
    K             PBKDF2-HMAC-SHA256(norm(pw), salt "QuadChroma/1 pw\0"
                  followed by the host's public key, 100000 rounds,
                  32 bytes)
    client_proof  HMAC-SHA256(K, "QuadChroma/1 auth client\0" + hh)
    host_proof    HMAC-SHA256(K, "QuadChroma/1 auth host\0" + hh)
    hh            the handshake hash of this video channel
    device ID     SHA-256("QuadChroma/1 ID\0" + public key); its first
                  four bytes as a big-endian number, modulo 10^9

    Proofs are compared in constant time. Test vectors (host public key
    the bytes 01 to 20 hex, hh 32 times AA): device ID 581 729 911,
    norm("K7M 4WQ-9TZ") = "k7m4wq9tz", and for "k7m-4wq-9tz"
      K            0d49cfceed95c9e251f41acead7e619c
                   3983ab763249052d022a2efe03149842
      client_proof 647398d505263b3af01ba1a04d74aeb4
                   67a774588902489bca97c8d3544e3fc0
      host_proof   2f9d511fa97017f1d5b60806aa5ff4d7
                   81766e386b92f79d77391e4090cef55d
    The Rust side (client/src/zugang.rs) and the Mac host
    (host/zugang.c, test harness zugangtest) check them in their tests.

    Announcement (UDP 9003, every 2 s): "QCHB", u8 1, u16 video port,
    u8 n, n bytes of name (at most 40), then u8 ext (1), u32 device ID,
    u8 flags (bit 0: someone at the host can click "Allow"; bits 1 to 7
    are 0) - at most 54 bytes. Older clients stop reading after the
    name; a client shows "ID -" for a host without the extension. The
    name is the computer name: on the Mac the one from System Settings
    (read again every 30 s), on Windows the DNS host name. Nothing in
    the announcement is authenticated; the client uses the ID only to
    show and find a host.

Mac: one app for both directions
--------------------------------

On the Mac, too, QuadChroma is one app: QuadChroma.app controls other
computers and, with "Share this Mac" switched on (the default), lets other
devices control this Mac - in one process, with one icon in the menu bar.
Its executable is the Rust client with the Mac host engine built in (see
"Building" below); the bundle identifier (tech.quadchroma.host) and the
signature stay those of the former host app, so permissions granted to
it remain valid.

Start: the very first start (einstellungen.txt without fenster_gezeigt=1)
opens the window; every later start stays in the menu bar without a
window and without a Dock icon, and takes the focus from nobody. A start
as a login item ("Start at login") always does, also before the window
was ever shown (see "Start at login" below). A double-click on the
running app in the Finder, or a second start (for example "open -n"),
opens the window; with the window open the app has a Dock icon and its
own menu, hidden again it is only the icon. That menu's one item is
"Close window" (Cmd+Q) while the menu bar icon stands - it hides the
window like the red button, quitting is in the icon's menu - and "Quit
QuadChroma" (Cmd+Q) when there is no icon to return to. A start with an
address or a device ID opens the window at once. The engine is set up
when the app starts (key, access, menu); it listens only while sharing
is on.

The icon: four squares like the program icon, the lower right one only
outlined, with a dot in it while a viewer is connected. A click on it
opens the menu:

    QuadChroma - <device name>
    Ready for connections      or "Connected: <name>", "Port 9001 is
                               used by another program", "Sharing is off"
    Open QuadChroma            the window (start screen)
    Connect: <host>            up to four hosts found on the network;
                               opens the window and connects
    Device ID: 581 729 911     a click copies the nine digits
    Password: k7m-4wq-9tz      a click copies it, marked as concealed
    Change password ...
    New random password
    Allowed devices >          per device "<name> - ID ... - since
                               <date>" > "Remove"; then "Remove all
                               devices ..."; empty: "No devices yet"
    Change device name ...
    Share this Mac             check mark: sharing is on
    Start at login             with a check mark when it is on; the same
                               as the check box on the start screen
    Prevent sleep while QuadChroma is running
    Screen Recording not allowed - open System Settings ...
    Accessibility not allowed - open System Settings ...
                               both only while sharing is on and that
                               permission is missing; a click opens its
                               page in System Settings > Privacy & Security
    Quit QuadChroma            the only way to quit the app

Device ID, password and allowed devices stay in the menu and can be
managed while sharing is off. The menu speaks the language chosen in the
client (the start screen's language list; without a choice the first of
the Mac's preferred languages that QuadChroma knows, otherwise English).

Sharing ("Share this Mac" in the menu, the same button on the start
screen, einstellungen.txt: freigabe=an|aus, default on):

    - on: the ports 9001-9003 are open and the Mac announces itself
      ("Freigabe: an - der Host lauscht"). The first time in a run the
      host also asks for its permissions (Screen Recording at once,
      Accessibility once per Mac) - with sharing off macOS asks for
      nothing.
    - off: a connected viewer is told goodbye (message 13, reason 1:
      "<Name> stopped sharing."), a viewer that is just coming in gets
      "QCH1" and the same goodbye instead of a session, and image,
      input and announcement ports close at once ("Freigabe aus:
      Verbindung zum Zuschauer <Fingerabdruck> geschlossen (Abschied
      gemeldet)", "Freigabe aus: Bild-, Eingabe- und Bekanntgabeport
      zu"). Switched on again, it listens on the same ports ("Freigabe
      an: Bild 9001, Eingabe 9002, Bekanntgabe 9003").

If another QuadChroma host of this user already runs (for example the
former stand-alone QuadChroma.app, lock file host-instanz.lock), sharing
stays off and the menu says "Port 9001 is used by another program"; a
click on "Share this Mac" tries again. If another program holds port
9001, the host keeps running, the menu says so, and it tries again every
3 s ("Port 9001 ist belegt (anderes Programm?) - der Host wartet und
versucht es alle 3 s erneut", later "Port 9001 wieder frei - der Dienst
laeuft"). It announces itself only once it has the port.

Local network: on macOS 15 and later the system asks once whether
QuadChroma may find and connect to devices on the local network (the
announcement and the host list need it). Without it no host is found and
none finds this Mac.

After a copy, "Copied" appears next to the icon for a moment. "Change
password ..." opens a small window "Change password" with the fields
"New password (at least 8 characters)" and "Repeat password" and the
buttons "OK" and "Cancel". It answers "At least 8 characters, please.",
"The passwords do not match.", "The password contains characters that
are not allowed." (a line break, or more than 128 bytes), "Password
saved." or "The password could not be saved." - then the old password
still applies. If "New random password" cannot save, the same sentence
appears next to the icon for 4 s. With a damaged device list the menu
shows "Device list damaged" and "Reset device list" instead of "Allowed
devices", with an unreadable password file "Password file unreadable -
new devices only via "Allow"." instead of the password (see "Encryption
and access"). The date in the list is written the way the menu's
language writes dates. Cmd+C, Cmd+V, Cmd+X, Cmd+A and Cmd+Z work in the
fields of these windows (the app's menu carries them invisibly).

Device name: the same setting as on Windows (einstellungen.txt:
geraetename=, default the computer name from System Settings > General >
About). "Change device name ..." in the menu and "Rename" next to the
start screen line "This computer: <name> - <device ID>" open a small
window "Device name" with the same rules and texts as on Windows (1 to
40 bytes of UTF-8, no control or direction characters; empty means the
computer name). A new name applies at once: in the menu's first line,
in the announcement from its next round, in message 20 from the next
access phase and in message 3 from the next connection (the host's log:
Geraetename: "<Name>").

Prevent sleep: "Prevent sleep while QuadChroma is running" (a check mark
in the menu, a check box on the start screen; einstellungen.txt:
ruhezustand_verhindern=1, default off) keeps the Mac from going to sleep
by itself while the app runs - sessions or not; the display may still
turn off. It is a power assertion of the app (IOPMAssertion
PreventUserIdleSystemSleep) named with the text of the check item, listed
by "pmset -g assertions" (non-ASCII characters of the name appear
garbled there, the assertion is fine). Switching it off or quitting
releases it at once ("Ruhezustand: verhindert, solange QuadChroma
laeuft", "Ruhezustand: wieder erlaubt"). If macOS refuses the assertion,
the setting stays, but check mark and check box show what applies - off
- and a disabled line under the check mark (in amber next to the check
box) gives the reason with the system's code, "Not active: refused by
the system (0x...)"; the log says "Ruhezustand: nicht umgestellt -
IOPMAssertionCreateWithName: 0x...". Another click tries again. The
host's keep-awake during a session (display included) is independent of
it.

Start at login registers the app as a login item in System Settings
(SMAppService). The menu item and the check box "Start at login" on the
start screen - directly below "Prevent sleep while QuadChroma is
running" - show the same state and switch the same way; a change in one
appears in the other (the check box reads the state twice a second). It
works only when QuadChroma.app lies in /Applications; elsewhere the menu
item is disabled with "Move QuadChroma to Applications first" below it,
and the check box is disabled with that reason next to it. If macOS
wants the login item approved first, check mark and check box show a
dash, and a click opens the Login Items settings.

At login the app always starts silently in the menu bar, with sharing
as it was left - also on a Mac where its window was never shown. macOS
starts a login item without arguments; the app recognizes it by the
launch event (the "open application" Apple event carries "launched as
login item", keyAELaunchedAsLogInItem), read while the launch is
handled. Whether macOS sets that mark for login items registered with
SMAppService could not be verified without logging in; so a start also
counts as a login start when "Start at login" is on and the console
login (utmpx, as shown by "who") is at most 120 s ago. Every start logs
what it found, for example "Start: Apple-Ereignis aevt/oapp, Eigenschaft
lgit, Beim Anmelden starten An, Anmeldung vor 8 s - Anmeldeobjekt
(Startereignis)"; if the window would otherwise have opened, then also
"Start im Hintergrund (Anmeldeobjekt) - das Fenster kommt mit
"QuadChroma oeffnen"". A click on the check box logs "Beim Anmelden
starten: umschalten (war Aus)" (the host's log: "Oberflaeche: Beim
Anmelden starten eingeschaltet").

Permissions: without Screen Recording the host does not quit. When
sharing goes on, it asks for it (macOS shows its dialog), the menu shows
the missing permission, and the host checks again every 3 s. A viewer
who connects meanwhile gets in and sees "The host has no display right
now" until the capture can start - the same happens when the capture
cannot start for another reason (no display, for example). Whether
macOS lets the running host use a permission granted later without a
restart has not been verified on a device yet; if the menu line stays
after granting, quit QuadChroma and start it again. Accessibility (for
mouse and keyboard) is asked for only once, at the first time sharing
goes on (remembered by the empty file host-bedienungshilfen-gefragt next
to host.key); after that only the menu shows it. Without it the host
ignores mouse and keyboard. The audio the host captures never includes
the app's own playback (the client's sound of another computer).

Quitting - "Quit QuadChroma" in the menu bar icon's menu - ends client
and host together: a viewer is told goodbye first (message 13, reason 0:
"QuadChroma was closed on <Name>.", waiting at most 3 s). The same
happens at logout, with SIGTERM or SIGINT ("Oberflaeche: Signal
SIGTERM - beende"). In the
window nothing quits while the icon stands: "Close window" on the start
screen, Cmd+Q, Cmd+W, ESC and the red button hide the window (see
"Closing the window"). Without an icon (tray=aus, or macOS does not show
it) they quit, and the button is called "Quit". While the client shows a
session, Cmd+Q, Cmd+W and Cmd+H go to the remote Mac, not to the app.

The host's log: host-protokoll.txt in the app folder
(~/Library/Application Support/QuadChroma/), appended across starts; at
8 MB it moves to host-protokoll.alt.txt. (The few lines audio and
clipboard write themselves still go to /tmp/quadchroma-m1.log.) The
client's own log stays protokoll.txt next to it.

For experts the switches stay: --serve [port], --fps N, --mbit N,
--fest, --display N, --out <B>x<H> are passed to the host engine (never
taken for an address), for example

    open -n /Applications/QuadChroma.app \
            --args --serve 9001 --fps 120 --mbit 50

(only when the app is not running yet - otherwise the second start just
opens the window). The tools --list, --capture <seconds> <file> and
--formattest run and end without window or service; they ask for Screen
Recording. A switch without its value keeps the default and says so
("--fps: Wert 1 fehlt - der Standard gilt").

Self-tests without service and without capture: --menueleiste-selbsttest
builds the icon and its menu as the app does, in a throw-away home
folder, checks the entries and their effect and ends (exit code 0);
--ruhe-selbsttest sets the power assertion, finds it in pmset -g
assertions and releases it.

More log lines of the menu bar (the access phase: see "Encryption and
access"):

    "Oberflaeche: Menueleiste, Sprache <Code> (die eine App)"
    "Oberflaeche: Beim Anmelden starten eingeschaltet" or
     "... ausgeschaltet"
    "Bildschirmaufnahme-Freigabe jetzt erteilt" or "... entzogen", the
     same for "Bedienungshilfen-Freigabe"
    "Bildschirmaufnahme nicht freigegeben - Zuschauer bekommt
     Hoststatus 1, Aufnahme startet mit der Freigabe"
    "Oberflaeche: Beenden - Verbindung zum Zuschauer wird geschlossen"
    "Oberflaeche: Signal SIGTERM - beende"

The former stand-alone host (host/start.m) is still built by "make
host-allein" as build/quadchroma-host, for test harnesses only; it
keeps /tmp/quadchroma-m1.log and shows the host's menu without the
client's entries.

Mac client
----------

The client of QuadChroma.app is the same Rust client as on Windows
(arm64): audio via AudioToolbox, clipboard via NSPasteboard (text and
files), decoding with VideoToolbox, display through Metal (no choice of
graphics cards in the Display tab). Closing hides it in the menu bar, in
the one icon of the app (see "Mac: one app for both directions"); there
is no desktop shortcut on the Mac. It needs no FFmpeg.

Full screen on the Mac (F11, the default) is borderless and hides the
menu bar and the Dock completely - moving the mouse to the screen edge
does not bring them back, the whole screen belongs to the remote
computer. They return when full screen is left (F11), when the window is
hidden, and while another app is in front (Cmd+Tab): the setting applies
only while QuadChroma is the active app. If the menu bar and Dock were
still hidden after leaving full screen, the app shows them again and
logs "Vollbild verlassen: Menueleiste und Dock wieder sichtbar".

Building: "make" in the repository builds the app - cargo build
--release --locked in client/ (the host engine from host/ is compiled
into it by client/build.rs), then build/QuadChroma.app with the binary
as Contents/MacOS/quadchroma, signed (see the Makefile). The binary alone
also runs from the terminal:

    cd client
    cargo build --release
    ./target/release/quadchroma 192.168.178.194:9001

Started like that (outside the bundle), macOS attributes the permissions
to the terminal, not to QuadChroma.app, and "Start at login" is disabled.

Decoding on the Mac: VideoToolbox in the media engine of Apple silicon
decodes HEVC 4:4:4 and 4:2:0 in 8 and 10 bits and H.264 (measured in the
client on the M1: about 5.6 ms per 1080p frame for HEVC 4:4:4 at 10
bits, the decode time of its statistics). The decoder
row of the Display tab has two buttons there: Automatic (the media
engine) and Processor (VideoToolbox without hardware). If the media
engine cannot decode the stream, the client falls back to the processor
as on Windows and names the reason in the statistics. The statistics
call the decoder "VideoToolbox" or "VideoToolbox (Software)"; the log
names the format VideoToolbox delivers, for 4:4:4 at 10 bits:

    "VideoToolbox: 1920x1080 HEVC 4:4:4 10 Bit, Hardware ja, Ausgabe xf44
     (voller Wertebereich)"

(i.e. hardware yes, output format xf44, full range). If the media engine
fails in the middle of a stream (after sleep, or a transient error such
as kVTVideoDecoderMalfunctionErr), the client drops the decoder session
and waits for the next key frame, which creates a new one; decode errors
are logged at most once per five seconds with the number of errors in
between ("VideoToolbox: Decodierfehler bei Bild <n>: ... - Sitzung
verworfen, neu mit dem naechsten Schluesselbild"). --decodertest on
the Mac encodes a short HEVC 4:4:4 sample with the hardware encoder and
decodes it with and without hardware (neither host nor screen capture is
started).

Display on the Mac: Metal. The decoded frames go to the GPU without a
copy, conversion to RGB and scaling run there in shaders - bit-identical
to the processor path, also when scaled - and the user interface sits on
top as a separate layer. Frames are shown at the display refresh
(no tearing), with at most two frames queued; the window thread never
waits for the display. The Display tab has two buttons there: Automatic
(Metal) and Processor (softbuffer). If Metal cannot be set up, the client
draws on the processor by itself. It also switches while running: when
not a single Metal frame reaches the screen of a visible window within
three seconds and 60 attempts (then the interface, Processor button
included, would be invisible too), and when the graphics device is lost
and cannot be rebuilt; the next start tries Metal again. A covered window
does not present; once it is visible again, the last frame is presented
once more. The log says which one it is:

    "Anzeige: Metal Apple M1 (gemeinsamer Speicher ja), 2560x1440 bei
     Massstab 2, Bildwechsel abwarten, hoechstens 2 Bilder unterwegs"

or "Anzeige: Rueckfall auf Software: <Grund>" followed by "Anzeige:
Software" (while running, for example "Anzeige: Rueckfall auf Software:
Metal zeigt nichts - am sichtbaren Fenster kam kein Bild auf dem Schirm
an"). Streams in limited range (VideoToolbox then delivers x444,
444v, x420 or 420v) are stretched to full range on both paths.

    ./target/release/quadchroma --anzeigetest /tmp/anzeigetest

checks Metal without a connection and without a window: every
VideoToolbox format in two sizes against the processor path (zero
tolerance for the conversion, the scaled and the 1:1 picture; the
interface on top may differ by 2 steps, as on Windows), difference images
into the directory, then 240 frames at 2560x1440 in a 120 Hz cadence
through both shaders with the frame time of the window thread and of the
GPU (M1: about 1.8 ms GPU time per frame; decoding and the way from the
finished frame to the screen are not included). Exit code 0 only if every
comparison passed. Neither host nor screen capture is started.

    ./target/release/quadchroma --anzeige-selbsttest

checks Metal in a real window (small, always on top, a few seconds, no
Dock icon): frames reach the screen (presentedTime), the Metal layer
covers the view with the right scale and pixel size, also after a
resize, hiding and showing the window is reported and a frame is
presented again afterwards, and once Metal is dropped, softbuffer draws
in the same window. Exit code 0 passed, 1 failed, 3 not verifiable: the
window was never visible to AppKit (locked screen, sleep, or a virtual
display nobody is watching) - run it on an unlocked desktop. Neither
host, screen capture nor network is started.

Storage: ~/Library/Application Support/QuadChroma/ (hosts.txt,
einstellungen.txt, protokoll.txt, benchmark.txt, plus einzel.sock and
einzel.lock of the single instance) - the same folder as the host
engine (bildschirm.txt and the files named host-* belong to it). host.key
is the device key of both: the client calls with it; a client.key of an
earlier version stays unused. The client creates a new folder for the
owner only (0700), new keys and lists with 0600; existing files and
folders keep their permissions. A host lets it
in like any client: with the access password or a click on "Allow".

License note: the Mac client contains no FFmpeg - only Apple frameworks
and the Rust crates listed in THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.txt. It is distributed
inside QuadChroma.app (the DMG and ZIP of a release), not as a program
of its own. LICENSE.txt, THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.txt, README.txt and
MANUAL.txt lie next to the app in the DMG and in the ZIP's folder, and
inside the app in QuadChroma.app/Contents/Resources, so they travel with
every copy of it.

Keys:

    F9         statistics on and off (the menu sets which lines)
    F10        menu - or hold ESC for two seconds
    F11        full screen on and off (on the Mac without menu bar and
               Dock, see "Mac client")
    F12        pixel-exact rendering instead of stretched
    Ctrl+Esc   back to the start screen

Every key function is also a switch in the menu; nobody has to memorize
the keys.

Windows: one app for both directions
------------------------------------

On Windows the app requires administrator rights: Windows asks once via
UAC at every start (a viewer used only as a client sees the same prompt).
This is required so the host role can control windows with higher rights
in the user's session - Task Manager, the registry editor, installer
windows - which Windows otherwise shields from injected input (see "Keys
arrive over the connection ..." under "Windows as host"). The exe carries
requireAdministrator in its manifest; the real UAC consent prompt on the
secure desktop stays out of reach either way. On a standard account the
UAC prompt asks for an administrator's user name and password at every
start; the app then runs as that administrator, not as the signed-in
user, and "Start with Windows" is not available (see below).

On Windows the client and the host role run in one process with one icon
in the notification area. The host role is part of the app from the
start (its own thread, its own log host-protokoll.txt); "Share this PC"
decides whether it listens:

    - on (the default, einstellungen.txt: freigabe=an): the ports are open
      and the PC announces itself on the network; the app holds the mutex
      Local\QuadChroma-Host of the host role ("Freigabe: an").
    - off (freigabe=aus): no port is open; a connected viewer is told
      goodbye (message 13, reason 1: "<Name> stopped sharing.")
      ("Freigabe: aus"). Device ID, password and allowed devices stay
      visible in the menu and can be managed.

The switch is the button "Share this PC" on the start screen (a check box
in it shows the state; the tooltip says "Sharing is on" or "Sharing is
off") and the same item with a check mark in the icon's menu. If another
QuadChroma host already holds the mutex in this Windows session or port
9001 is taken, the menu says "Port 9001 is used by another program" and
the app tries again every 5 s.

Start: the very first start (einstellungen.txt without fenster_gezeigt=1)
opens the window. Every later start, "Start with Windows"
(quadchroma.exe --hintergrund) and quadchroma.exe --host stay in the
notification area - the last two always, even before the window was
ever shown; window and renderer are only created by "Open QuadChroma"
(or a click on the icon, or a second start of the exe). Until then the
app waits for events without a timer. A start with an address, a device
ID or a desktop shortcut always opens the window, and so does a start
with tray=aus - without an icon there would be no way back. A start in
the background while the app already runs ends at once ("QuadChroma
laeuft schon - der Start im Hintergrund endet.").

"Start with Windows" is the item in the icon's menu and the check box
of the same name on the start screen, directly below "Prevent sleep
while QuadChroma is running"; both show whether the scheduled task of
the account the app runs under exists and is enabled, and a click in
either switches it. Every account has a task of its own, named
"QuadChroma (<SID of the account>)" - for example "QuadChroma
(S-1-5-21-1413765741-3029102522-1828496402-1002)" -, so two
administrator accounts on one PC switch their autostart on and off
independently, and neither sees the other's task ticked. The task runs
at that account's logon with highest privileges (elevated, so it starts
without a UAC prompt at logon; run level HIGHEST, logon type
InteractiveToken - it runs in the user's interactive session after
login, not as a service before it), its action being the installed exe
with --hintergrund. It also starts and keeps running on battery, has no
time limit and runs at normal priority, like a start by hand; a task
that QuadChroma 0.1.0 created with Windows' defaults (no start on
battery, ended after 3 days, below-normal priority, started at any
account's logon) is registered again with these settings at the next
start. A Startup-folder shortcut is no longer used: an exe with
requireAdministrator would not launch silently from there.

Installed copy: a task that starts a program as administrator without
asking must not point at a folder that programs with normal rights can
change (Downloads, the Desktop, a network share) - they could swap the
exe or a DLL there and be started elevated at the next logon. Switching
"Start with Windows" on therefore first installs the running app into
%ProgramFiles%\QuadChroma (normally C:\Program Files\QuadChroma, found
through the system's known folder, not an environment variable):
quadchroma.exe, the avcodec-63.dll and avutil-61.dll it has loaded and
the text files next to the exe (LICENSE, THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES, README,
MANUAL, FFMPEG-BUILDINFO). The exe and the two DLLs are locked from the
moment quadchroma.exe starts until it quits: it opens them for reading
and lets other programs only read them, so nobody - not even an
administrator - can rename, move, replace or delete them, or rename the
folder they are in, while the app runs. At that start it also checks
that the locked files are the ones Windows loaded (same path, and the
file behind the loaded code has not been renamed away and replaced).
They are copied only through these locked handles, never opened again
by name, and before writing, each exe and DLL is compared with the code
loaded in memory (headers, code, constants and resources, with the
relocations applied; only the places the loader writes itself are left
out). If a file cannot be locked or does not match, nothing is installed
or refreshed and the task stays as it is. When the app itself runs from
C:\Program Files\QuadChroma nothing is locked: nothing is copied from
there, and a newer version must be able to rename the running one
aside. Each file is written under a temporary name, read back and
compared by SHA-256, and checked for its rights; only then are all
renamed into place, the exe last, and a failure rolls everything back.
A running older copy there is renamed aside and deleted, or at the next
restart if it is still in use. Folder, parent folder and every file
must be owned by Administrators, SYSTEM or TrustedInstaller and must not
let any other account write, delete or change permissions; a network or
removable drive, a UNC path or a junction is refused. The task is
created only for an exe that passes these checks. If the app already
runs from that folder, only the task is created. The start screen says
"Installed to C:\Program Files\QuadChroma - QuadChroma starts from there
with Windows." for 6 s (without a visible window a balloon at the icon
says it); if it fails, a line in amber says that "Start with Windows"
could not be changed and that the details are in protokoll.txt.
Switching it off deletes the task and leaves the installed copy (delete
the folder to remove it).

No downgrade: the installed copy is replaced only if the running exe is
not older. Compared is the file version in the version resource of both
exe files (File version in the exe's Properties, 0.1.0.0 for 0.1.0). A
newer running exe replaces the installed copy; the same version with
different files (another build) replaces it as well; an older one never
replaces a newer installed copy - switching "Start with Windows" on then
points the task at the newer installed copy and leaves it as it is, and
the log says so. A running exe without a readable version does not
replace an installed copy that has one.

At every start (of the first instance) the app checks the task of its
account: one of an earlier version that still starts another exe (the
unpacked folder) is moved to the installed copy after installing; if the
task starts the installed copy but the running exe or its DLLs differ
from it (SHA-256), the installed copy is refreshed - unless it is newer
(see above). So an update is: quit QuadChroma in the icon's menu, start
the new quadchroma.exe once. Earlier versions created one task
"QuadChroma" for the whole PC; if it belongs to this account (its
principal, read from the task's XML), it is taken over at the
start - install, the task of this account, then "QuadChroma" is deleted
-, and switching off deletes it along with this account's task. A task
"QuadChroma" of another account stays as it is (a line in the log). A
disabled task counts as off and is not switched on again at the start.
A shortcut of earlier versions in the Startup folder ("QuadChroma.lnk"
with --hintergrund, or the older "QuadChroma - Freigabe.lnk" with
--host) counts as on and, if it starts this exe, is replaced the same
way (install, task, then the shortcut is deleted); a shortcut to another
copy stays as it is, so a test or portable copy never takes over the
autostart. The Startup folder belongs to the user while the app runs as
administrator, so each shortcut is opened once - without following a
link, readable only for others until it is gone - read, checked and
deleted through that one handle; a symbolic link or a file that is no
readable shortcut stays as it is (a line in the log). schtasks.exe is
started from the system folder Windows itself reports, never via
%SystemRoot% or PATH, and the app sets %SystemRoot% and %windir% back to
the real Windows folder when it starts: an account can set both for
itself without administrator rights.

If this fails - at the start, or when switching on - no task of this
account stays enabled that starts an exe in a folder others than
administrators can change (an earlier version pointed at the unpacked
folder): it is disabled (schtasks /Change /DISABLE), and so is the task
"QuadChroma" of this account whose takeover failed. The start screen
then shows in amber that "Start with Windows" could not be changed and
that the details are in protokoll.txt; switching it on again once the
cause is fixed creates the task anew.

Standard accounts: when the app runs under another account than the one
signed in to the session (a standard user entered an administrator's
credentials at UAC), or under an account that is no administrator, the
check box and the menu item are disabled with "Only with an
administrator account", and nothing is installed or moved at the start
(a task at logon with highest privileges could not start the exe for a
standard user, and it would run for the administrator's logon, not for
this user's). Only a task of the account the app runs under that still
starts an exe from a folder others can change is disabled, as above.
Without an interactive session (over ssh) only the check for an
administrator account applies.

Log lines (protokoll.txt):

    "Mit Windows starten: an - nach <folder> installiert (SHA-256: ...);
     die geplante Aufgabe (hoechste Rechte, bei der Anmeldung) startet
     <folder>\quadchroma.exe --hintergrund"   (installed, task created;
                                       with "; die alte Fassung lief
                                       noch - ... beim naechsten
                                       Neustart" if an old copy was in use)
    "Mit Windows starten: an - die App laeuft schon aus <folder>, nur die
     geplante Aufgabe angelegt ..."   (runs from there already)
    "Mit Windows starten: an - die Kopie in <folder> stimmt schon mit
     dieser exe ueberein, nur die geplante Aufgabe angelegt ..."
    "Mit Windows starten: an - die installierte Kopie (<version>) ist
     neuer als diese exe (<version>) - sie wird nicht durch die aeltere
     ersetzt; die geplante Aufgabe ... startet <folder>\quadchroma.exe
     --hintergrund"                   (no downgrade; at the start without
                                       "an - " and "die geplante Aufgabe")
    "Mit Windows starten: aus - die geplante Aufgabe ist geloescht; die
     installierte Kopie in <folder> bleibt liegen"
    "... - die installierte Kopie war eine andere, nicht neuere Fassung
     als diese exe und ist erneuert", "... - die Aufgabe startete bisher
     <command>", "... - sie ersetzt die fruehere Aufgabe "QuadChroma"
     fuer den ganzen Rechner (startete <command>)", "... - die alte
     Verknuepfung im Autostart-Ordner ist dadurch ersetzt"
                                       (at the start, see above)
    "Mit Windows starten: die Aufgabe "<name>" ist neu registriert (auch
     im Akkubetrieb, ohne Zeitlimit, Prioritaet 4, nur bei der Anmeldung
     dieses Kontos) - vorher: <what differed>"   (at the start: a task
                                       of 0.1.0 with Windows' defaults;
                                       a task of that name running as
                                       another account stays as it is,
                                       "... laeuft als <account>, nicht
                                       als dieses Konto ...")
    "Mit Windows starten: die fruehere Aufgabe "QuadChroma" gehoert
     <account>, nicht diesem Konto - sie bleibt, wie sie ist ..."
    "Mit Windows starten: die Aufgabe "<name>" (<command>) ist
     abgeschaltet (schtasks /Change /DISABLE) - <reason>"
    "Mit Windows starten: gesperrt - <reason>"   (standard account)
    "Mit Windows starten nicht umgestellt: <error>"   (switching; at the
                                       start "... beim Start nicht
                                       geprueft bzw. nicht umgestellt -
                                       <error>")
    "... exe und DLLs nicht gesperrt: <file>: nicht gesperrt (<error>)",
    "... - nicht die geladene Datei, nichts kopiert"   (in <error>: a
                                       file could not be locked, or it
                                       does not match the loaded code)

The same without a window, from a terminal started as administrator:

    quadchroma.exe --autostart on|off      (also an|aus)

prints the line the log would get (it writes no protokoll.txt) and ends
with exit code 0 (done), 1 (failed), 2 (wrong call, or not Windows) or 3
(locked: no administrator account; a task of this account that still
starts an exe from a folder others can change is disabled then too).
The lines go to the terminal, or wherever the output is redirected:
"quadchroma.exe --autostart on > autostart.txt 2>&1" writes them into
the file (Start-Process -RedirectStandardOutput/-RedirectStandardError
and pipes work as well).

--host [port] is "start in the background with sharing on": it switches
sharing on and remembers it, so shortcuts of earlier versions keep
working. --nur-host [port] is the host role alone, without window and
client (for a VM and for tests, see "Windows as host").

Quitting ("Quit" in the icon's menu) ends both roles; a connected
viewer is told goodbye first (reason 0: "QuadChroma was closed on
<Name>.").
The same happens at logoff or shutdown, when an installer closes the app
(Restart Manager) and when another program sends WM_CLOSE to the hidden
window of the icon (class QuadChromaSymbol): "Infobereich: QuadChroma
wird beendet (<Grund>)".

Device name: other devices see this computer under one name - in their
host list (announcement), in the Allow window and the device list of a
host it connects to (message 3), and in their access dialog when they
connect to this PC (message 20). By default it is the computer name of
Windows. "Change device name ..." in the icon's menu and "Rename" next to
the start screen line "This computer: <name> - <device ID>" open a small
window "Device name": the field shows the current name; leading and
trailing spaces are removed; 1 to 40 bytes of UTF-8 without control
characters are allowed ("The name is too long (at most 40 bytes)." or
"The name contains characters that are not allowed."); an empty field,
or exactly the computer name, means the computer name again. A new name
applies at once, without a restart: the announcement from its next
round ("Bekanntgabe: Name jetzt <neu> (vorher <alt>)"), message 3 from
the next connection, message 20 from the next access phase. It is stored
in einstellungen.txt as geraetename=<Name> (no line: the computer name);
a value that does not pass the check is ignored.

Prevent sleep: "Prevent sleep while QuadChroma is running" (a check mark
in the icon's menu, a check box on the start screen; einstellungen.txt:
ruhezustand_verhindern=1, default off) keeps Windows from going to sleep
while the app runs - sessions or not; the display may still turn off. It
is a power request of the process (PowerSetRequest with
PowerRequestSystemRequired), listed by "powercfg /requests" (as
administrator) under SYSTEM as "[PROCESS] ...\quadchroma.exe" with the
text of the check box as the reason. Switching it off or quitting clears
it at once ("Ruhezustand: verhindert, solange QuadChroma laeuft",
"Ruhezustand: wieder erlaubt"). If Windows refuses the request, the
setting stays, but check mark and check box show off with the reason
and the system's code ("Not active: refused by the system (0x...)", a
disabled line under the check mark, in amber next to the check box);
another click tries again. The keep-awake of the host during a session
(display included) is independent of it.

Closing the window: notification area and menu bar
--------------------------------------------------

Closing (the X or Alt+F4, the button "Close window" and ESC on the start
screen, on the Mac also the red button and Cmd+W or Cmd+Q on the start
screen) does not quit the client, it hides it: on Windows as an
icon in the notification area next to the clock, on the Mac as the icon
at the top in the menu bar (four squares, the fourth outlined). A running
session is disconnected as with "Disconnect" - the host stops working.
While hidden, the client neither draws nor decodes; the search for
hosts, the single instance (see below) and the host role keep running.
On the Mac the
window leaves full screen first and returns to it when opened again;
while hidden, the app has no Dock icon there and does not appear in the
app switcher. On Windows this icon is the one icon of the app, client
and host role together, and so is the menu bar icon on the Mac; the
host-only process (--nur-host) has an icon of its own (see "Mac: one app
for both directions" and "Windows as host").

The icon is there from the start, not only after closing (except with
tray=aus, see below):

    Windows   Left-click, double-click or Enter shows the window,
              right-click opens the menu.
    Mac       A click opens the menu.

On Windows the menu is built anew each time it opens:

    QuadChroma - <device name>
    Ready for connections       or "Connected: <name>", "Port 9001 is used
                                by another program", "Sharing is off"
    Open QuadChroma             bold: what left-click and double-click do
    Connect: <name>             up to four computers of the start
                                screen's list, in its order
    Device ID: 581 729 911      a click copies the nine digits
    Password: k7m-4wq-9tz       a click copies it, marked as concealed
    Change password ...
    New random password
    Allowed devices >           per device "<name> - ID ... - since ..." >
                                Remove, and "Remove all devices ..."
    Change device name ...
    Share this PC               check mark when sharing is on
    Start with Windows          check mark when it is on; on a standard
                                account disabled, with the disabled line
                                "Only with an administrator account" below
    Prevent sleep while QuadChroma is running   check mark when it is on
    Quit

The Mac menu is listed under "Mac: one app for both directions"; like the
Windows menu it carries up to four "Connect: <name>" entries. The "Connect"
entries on both systems are the first four of the start screen's list: each
computer once, known ones first, then by name, this computer left out.
"Connect" works like a click on the host row: a session to the same host
stays, a session to another host is disconnected first. The tooltip reads
"QuadChroma", during a session "QuadChroma - <name or address>" (the program
uses an en dash instead of "-"), on Windows with sharing on and without a
session "QuadChroma - sharing this PC (ID 581 729 911)". Names appear in the
menu and in the tooltip with at most 40 characters; longer ones end in "...".
The first time the app is hidden, the hint "QuadChroma is still running in the
notification area." (Windows, balloon) or "QuadChroma is still running in the
menu bar." (Mac, bubble below the icon, 6 s) appears once. This is recorded in
einstellungen.txt as tray_hinweis=1, but only once the hint was actually
visible; with tray_hinweis=0 it appears once more.

Quitting: only "Quit" in the icon's menu ("Quit QuadChroma" on the Mac).
The start screen's button "Close window", ESC there and on the Mac Cmd+Q
and Cmd+W hide the app like the X; the button is called "Quit" and quits
only when there is no icon (tray=aus, or the icon does not stand, see
below). A WM_CLOSE to the window only hides the app, like the X. On
Windows a WM_CLOSE to the hidden window of the icon (class
QuadChromaSymbol) quits it with the goodbye to a viewer (see "Windows:
one app for both directions"); a hard end (taskkill /F, Stop-Process
-Id) sends no goodbye. taskkill
without /F sends WM_CLOSE to the visible windows of the process: the
window is hidden, and the invisible window of the single instance (see
below) closes as a result. If the app then keeps running in the
notification area, a second start or a double-click on a shortcut can
no longer find it and exits after 5 s with exit code 1 ("QuadChroma
laeuft schon, antwortet aber nicht (<Grund>).", i.e. already running
but not responding) until the app is quit.

tray=aus in einstellungen.txt turns hiding off: no icon, and closing
quits the program as it used to (the start screen's button then reads
"Quit"). The same applies without an icon: if
it cannot be created (for example without Explorer), is not registered
yet, or macOS does not show it (full menu bar, "Allow in the Menu Bar"
switched off), closing quits the program. So the app never becomes
invisible with no way back. If Explorer restarts, the icon registers
itself again.

To change this, edit the existing line tray=an to tray=aus (0, nein or
off work too), and do it while the app is not running: the file is read
only at start, and a running app writes it back with its own values on
the next save (for example when it is first hidden, with F9 or after a
change in the menu). tray= and tray_hinweis= apply only before the first
line "host ..."; below it they belong to that host and are skipped.

The log (protokoll.txt) records what happened; on the Mac the lines
begin with "Menueleiste:" (menu bar) instead of "Infobereich:"
(notification area):

    "Infobereich: Symbol angelegt"   (on the Mac once the icon stands in
                                      the menu bar, which takes macOS a
                                      moment after it was created)
    "Infobereich: kein Symbol (<Grund>) - Schliessen beendet das Programm"
    "Infobereich: Symbol (noch) nicht angemeldet (<Grund>) - Schliessen
     beendet, bis es steht"          (on the Mac only if the icon still
                                      does not stand after 3 s; closing
                                      checks again every time)
    "Infobereich: Fenster geschlossen - trenne <Adresse>"
    "Infobereich: Fenster abgelegt, QuadChroma laeuft weiter"
    "Infobereich: Fenster geschlossen - ohne Symbol bzw. mit tray=aus
     endet QuadChroma"
    "Infobereich: Hinweis nicht gezeigt - kommt beim naechsten Ablegen
     noch einmal"
    "Infobereich: Fenster wieder sichtbar"
    "Infobereich: verbinde mit <Adresse>" or "Infobereich: trenne
     <Adresse> und verbinde mit <Adresse>"
    "Infobereich: Beenden"

Self-test of the icon, without a connection, without the network
announcement and without protokoll.txt:

    quadchroma.exe --tray-selbsttest                       (Windows)
    ./target/release/quadchroma --menueleiste-selbsttest   (Mac)

It creates the icon, changes the tooltip and removes the icon again;
exit code 0 means passed, 1 failed (on Windows for example in a session
without Explorer, such as over ssh). The Mac test additionally checks
the image, the menu including its commands and the bubble, shows the
icon only briefly and reports the duration at the end. The switch of the
other platform exits with 2. On Windows run it from a terminal started as
administrator, like every switch (see "Starting (Windows)").

Only one app (single instance)
------------------------------

At most one client with a window runs per user session. If you start it a
second time - by hand, with an address or by double-clicking a desktop
shortcut -, the second start hands its address to the first one and exits
with 0 ("QuadChroma laeuft schon - <Adresse> weitergereicht." or, without
an address, "QuadChroma laeuft schon - nach vorn geholt."). The first one
brings its window to the front, also from the notification area or the
menu bar, and connects as if you had clicked "Connect": a session to the
same host stays up, a session to a different host is disconnected first.
Its log shows "Einzelinstanz: zweiter Start mit <Adresse> - verbinde" (or,
for the two cases just named, "... - Sitzung dorthin laeuft schon" and
"... - trenne <Adresse> und verbinde neu") or, for a second start without
an address, "Einzelinstanz: zweiter Start ohne Adresse - Fenster nach
vorn".

A shortcut that also carries a device ID hands the ID on too (the
second start then prints <Adresse>#<ID>), and the first one connects by
ID.

A start in the background (--hintergrund from "Start with Windows",
--host) does not hand anything over: if the app already runs, it ends
at once with 0 and leaves the window as it is.

This does not apply to anything that runs without a window: test mode
(--headless), the host-only process (--nur-host has a single instance
of its own, see "Windows as host"; --list, --messen), --verknuepfung,
--autostart, --shot and the self-tests (--tray-selbsttest,
--menueleiste-selbsttest, --ruhe-selbsttest, --anzeige-selbsttest,
--decodertest, --anzeigetest, --noisetest). None of them starts the host
role of the app.

Limits: an address longer than 508 bytes or containing control characters
is not handed on by the second start; it only brings the app to the front
and exits with 1 ("QuadChroma laeuft schon - nach vorn geholt, Adresse
nicht weitergereicht (<Grund>)."). If the running app does not answer for
5 s, the second start also exits with 1 ("QuadChroma laeuft schon,
antwortet aber nicht (<Grund>)."). If the running app is just shutting
down, the second start becomes the app itself and connects. If the single
instance does not work at all, the app runs without it ("Einzelinstanz:
nicht moeglich (<Grund>) - weiter ohne").

On Windows a mutex (Local\QuadChroma-Client) identifies the first
instance; the address is handed on via WM_COPYDATA to an invisible window
of the class QuadChromaEinzel, and the second start passes its right to
the foreground on to the first one. On the Mac it is a Unix socket
einzel.sock with the lock einzel.lock, both in
~/Library/Application Support/QuadChroma.

Desktop shortcut (Windows only)
-------------------------------

For every host you can put a shortcut on the desktop. Double-clicking it
connects at once - even when QuadChroma is already running or sits in the
notification area, in which case it goes through the single instance. It
is created

    - on the start screen with the "Desktop shortcut" button at the right
      of each found host's row,
    - in the menu, "Encryption" tab, with the "Desktop shortcut" button,
      for the connected host (name from the announcement if the address
      matches, otherwise the address).

The result stays in the message area or below the button for 6 s:
"Shortcut created on the desktop: <file>", otherwise in amber "Shortcut
not created: <reason>". The log shows "Verknuepfung angelegt: <Pfad>" or
"Verknuepfung fuer <Adresse> nicht angelegt: <Grund>".

The file is named "QuadChroma - <Name>.lnk" and is placed on the user's
desktop, even when the desktop is redirected to OneDrive. A trailing
".local" is removed from the name; characters that Windows does not allow
in file names become "_", trailing dots and spaces are removed, at most 64
characters. Without a name the address is used, with "_" instead of ":"
("QuadChroma - 192.168.178.194_9001.lnk"). An existing file of the same
name is overwritten - it is the same host. The shortcut calls

    <folder of the exe>\quadchroma.exe --verbinden "192.168.178.194:9001"
                                       --id 581729911

(<folder of the exe> is the folder of the exe, which is also the working
folder; everything on one line) - the same route as an address given at
startup. The device ID comes from the host's announcement (start screen)
or from its key (menu); for a host that announces no ID the shortcut
carries only the address, "192.168.178.194:9001" as before. Its icon is the
program icon (four colored squares) from %APPDATA%\QuadChroma\quadchroma.ico;
the file is written or renewed each time a shortcut is created. The exe
carries the same icon as a resource, so Explorer shows it for
quadchroma.exe too. The client draws the same icon itself at
startup for its window, in the title bar and the taskbar, and for the
notification area (on the Mac only for the menu bar, in one color). As
the comment, Windows shows "QuadChroma: connect to <name> (<address>)" in
the language of the interface.

Limits: the shortcut points with its full path to the exe it was created
with - if you move the exe, create it again. If the host gets a new
address, the ID finds it there as long as it announces itself in the
same network; the key must still give that ID (see "Remembered hosts"
under "Encryption and access"). A shortcut without an ID, or a host
outside the network announcement, still depends on the address.

Without a window and without a connection:

    quadchroma.exe --verknuepfung <adresse> [--name <name>]
                   [--ordner <verzeichnis>] [--id <ID>]

creates it (<adresse> is the host address, <verzeichnis> the target
folder, <ID> the host's device ID; without --ordner on the desktop;
without a port, 9001 applies), prints the path and exits with 0;
otherwise it prints "Verknuepfung nicht angelegt: <Grund>" (shortcut not
created) and returns 1 (for example without an address, with a switch
that has no value, with an --id that is not nine digits, or when the
folder does not exist). protokoll.txt is left untouched. On the Mac the
switch exits with 2, saying that the desktop shortcut exists only on
Windows ("Die Desktop-Verknuepfung (--verknuepfung) gibt es nur unter
Windows.").

The menu
--------

Hold ESC for two seconds (that ESC then does not reach the Mac) or press
F10. "Disconnect" sits in the header at the right, on every tab, with the
host's address below it. Six tabs:

    Picture         bitrate, frame rate, gaming mode, fixed frame rate,
                    sound, HDR (see "HDR"), host display, codec choice
    Display         fullscreen, pixel exact, statistics, nerd mode, which
                    statistics lines, card for display and decoder
                    (Automatic, Graphics card, Integrated, Processor)
    Encryption      method, comparison code, fingerprint, desktop
                    shortcut (Windows)
    Shortcuts       every key that the client intercepts itself
    Benchmark       measures codecs, frame rates and bitrates one after
                    another (see below)
    Computers       the QuadChroma computers in the network, as on the
                    start screen; a click switches the session there

Computers: the same list as on the start screen (name, device ID, check mark
for known computers, this computer left out, same order), under the sentence
"Click a computer to switch to it. This session ends." The current host is
marked "Connected"; hovering shows a row's address, and the mouse wheel or
trackpad scrolls a long list. A click on another computer ends the running
session as "Disconnect" does (keys released, connection closed, a running
benchmark stopped) and connects to that computer at once, without the usual
2 s pause; if it does not know this computer yet, the access dialog appears
("Reiter Computer: trenne <Adresse> und verbinde mit <Name> (<Adresse>, ID
<ID>)"). A click on the current host or ESC keeps the session.

Hovering the mouse over a switch immediately shows a sentence about what
it does - in each of the 29 languages.

The Mac applies a change at once and reports back what is actually in
effect - so what is shown is never a request but the state on the other
side. While the menu is open, mouse and keyboard belong to it and not to
the Mac. The values are stored per host (by fingerprint, not by address)
and set again automatically on the next connection.

Nerd mode: the statistics become wider and show the latency chain as bars
on a fixed millisecond scale - capture and queue, encoder, network,
decoder, display - with a mark for "One frame" and one for one monitor
refresh ("Monitor"), plus the load on the host (processor, graphics,
memory, encoder time against the frame budget) and on the client
(processor load, monitor rate, skipped frames). A link is marked as the
bottleneck when the chain is longer than one frame and this link accounts
for more than half of it.

Fixed frame rate: normally the Mac sends a new frame only when something
has actually changed - so the rate rises and falls with the content. With
this switch it holds the configured rate, even when the screen is
completely still. The timing becomes even, and no time is lost when
something finally moves again.

Measured on the Mac mini M1 at 1080p, target 120 frames/s:

    off    30 frames/s      9 % CPU load
    on    104 frames/s     25 % CPU load

The bitrate barely rises (51 to 66 Mbit/s), because an unchanged frame
costs almost nothing. What it does cost is constant load: the Mac's video
unit keeps running as long as the switch is on.

Without a viewer the host does no work: no capture, no encoder, and the
display may go to sleep. Capture and encoder are created only when someone
connects - which makes connecting take about one second longer - and
disappear again as soon as the viewer is gone. Measured: 0.6 % CPU load
when idle.

Codec choice: in the menu (hold ESC for two seconds or press F10),
"Picture" tab, you find the codecs the Mac actually supports - it queries
its encoder itself at startup. On the M1 these are HEVC in 4:4:4 and
4:2:0, each in 8 and 10 bit, and H.264. No host offers AV1 as long as the
protocol and the client do not know it; it is grayed out and does not run
in the benchmark, even if an older Windows host reports it. The switch
happens while running; the picture stands still for a blink. Even with a
still screen a keyframe follows right away: if the capture format changes
along with the codec (the Mac captures 4:4:4 and 4:2:0 differently) and
no new frame arrives, the Mac host converts the last frame into the new
format ("Takt: letztes Bild von xf44 nach 420f umgerechnet
(Aufnahmeformat gewechselt, kein neueres Bild)"; if that fails, the frame
is discarded and the next one comes from the capture: "... liess sich
nicht ... umrechnen - verworfen, das naechste kommt von der Aufnahme").
The first real frame after that again goes out as a keyframe. Two modes
carry the note "converted": the capture has no 4:4:4 in 8 bit, so there
the Mac converts beforehand, and that costs an extra pass - keep this in
mind for a fair comparison with the other modes.

Measured over the network, 1080p, target 120 frames/s, software decoder:

    HEVC 4:4:4 10 bit   about 24 ms, decoder  8.6 ms
    HEVC 4:2:0  8 bit   about 19 ms, decoder  6.8 ms
    H.264 High          about 33 ms, decoder 15.0 ms

In test mode the switch can be triggered:

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --codec 3

The number is the entry in the host's list (0 = HEVC 4:4:4 10 bit,
3 = HEVC 4:2:0 8 bit, 4 = H.264). The address may be in any position.

Also in test mode, --eingabeprobe checks the input path: as soon as the
input channel is up, the client sends two mouse movements (center of the
picture, then bottom right, one second apart) and exits one second later.
Whether they arrived is shown by the pointer position on the host.
Together with --bildschirm the probe waits until the request has gone out
and the host has answered it (at most 5 s): the mouse lands on the
requested display (see "Host display").

Frame rate: the host never sends more frames than configured.
ScreenCaptureKit likes to deliver 148 real frames per second on a 120 Hz
display - each of them used to go through encoder, network and decoder.
Now a frame gets the next free time slot or is dropped ("zu schnell", too
fast, in the host's log), and the encoder never gets more than a few
frames at once ("Encoder voll", encoder full) - better a skipped frame
than a queue that delays every movement by seconds. The Mac host keeps
at most two frames in its encoder: one being encoded, one waiting, so
the encoder never runs dry. At native 4K the encoder is the bottleneck
(M1, every frame different: HEVC 4:4:4 10 bit 85 frames/s, 11.8 ms per
frame); a third frame would only wait behind two others, about 12 ms
more latency for no extra throughput.

The same applies to congestion on the network: if more than 2 MB for the
viewer are waiting unsent (512 kB in gaming mode), the next frame does not
even go into the encoder ("Stau", congestion, in the host's five-second
status line). An encoded frame always goes out, so a tight link does not
produce a chain of keyframes that only makes the congestion worse. Only
the Windows host discards an encoded frame, when the backlog is already
above 4 MB, and then forces a keyframe ("Stau ueber der harten Grenze
(4096 kB): codiertes Bild verworfen, Vollbild erzwungen", at most every
10 s). If the viewer takes nothing for 2 s during congestion, it counts
as disconnected ("Zuschauer weg: nimmt seit 2 s nichts mehr ab (<n> Byte
im Stau)"). What counts as progress is what the viewer takes - so audio,
clipboard and pointer, which also go out during congestion, do not make a
live viewer look hung. The Mac host checks this even with a still screen,
every 5 s.

Audio and control messages bypass the congestion rule, but have limits of
their own. If the link is slower than the uncompressed audio (about
3 Mbit/s), audio is dropped instead of pushing out the picture: the Mac
host discards it as long as the backlog has been above the congestion
limit for 2 s ("Ton verworfen: Rueckstand seit 2 s ueber der Staugrenze -
Leitung langsamer als der Ton"), the Windows host as soon as more than
512 kB of audio are waiting (128 kB in gaming mode; "Leitung langsamer
als der Ton: Tonpaket verworfen (ueber 512 kB Ton wartet)").
Both lines are rate-limited; the count appears in the five-second status
line ("Ton: ..., N verworfen" or "| Ton verworfen: N", N being the number
of discarded packets). The Windows host never discards control messages;
a viewer that does not take more than 8 MB of them counts as disconnected
("Zuschauer weg: nimmt ueber 8192 kB Steuernachrichten nicht ab").

Without a fixed frame rate, both hosts deliver a skipped last frame late:
if the newest frame was dropped as "zu schnell", during congestion or
because the encoder was full, and no newer one came within one frame
time, it goes into the encoder after all - so when a movement ends, the
viewer still sees the final frame (with the software encoder h264_mf the
Windows host keeps pushing until it is out, see the Windows host section).
During congestion it waits until the link is free again. Both hosts
measure the frame time from the arrival of the last frame, not from its
capture. The Mac host counts it in the five-second status line as
"nachgereicht" (delivered late); the Windows host counts it under
"nachgelegt", without a line of its own. Frames delivered late do not
count toward the measured latency.

Gaming mode tightens the reins: more frequent keyframes and a smaller
permitted backlog, so that nothing piles up during motion. It costs some
bandwidth and gives steadier frames in return.

The "Sound" switch in the same tab turns off audio transmission: the host
then sends no audio packets (about 3 Mbit/s less), and the client plays
nothing. The setting is stored per host. In test mode it is the fifth
value of --set (--set 50,120,0,1,0 = sound off).

If the output device goes away on Windows - headphones unplugged, format
changed in the sound settings, a different default device chosen -, the
client opens the then-current default device by itself after about one
second and keeps playing; nobody has to reconnect. If there is no device
at the moment, it tries again every half second. The log shows the reason
("Ton: ... - Ausgabegeraet wird neu geoeffnet") and when it works again
("Ton: Ausgabegeraet wieder offen"). If a device is missing already when
connecting, it keeps searching the same way ("Ton: Ausgabegeraet oeffnen:
<Grund> - neuer Versuch alle 500 ms", then "Ton: Ausgabegeraet offen").

If the rate or channel count of the audio changes on the host - on the
Mac, for example, an output device with 44.1 kHz, on Windows a device
with a different rate -, the host announces the format anew, and the
client rebuilds its output for it; it releases the old output first - if
the rebuild fails, it stays silent rather than wrong. The Mac host logs
"Tonformat gewechselt: <Rate> Hz, <n> Kanaele - neu angesagt".

About the bitrate: the value is a cap, and the encoder does use all of it.
150 Mbit/s means 150 Mbit/s with a moving picture. That is fine on your
own network; otherwise better set 25 to 50. H.264 does not cope with very
high values: at 500 Mbit/s Apple's encoder only manages about 30 frames
per second.

Decoder and display on Windows
------------------------------

Graphics cards: at startup the client enumerates the cards (log:
"Karte 0: <Name> - Grafikkarte, <MB> MB, Ausgang ja/nein, UMA ja/nein" -
card, name, role, memory, display output yes/no, unified memory yes/no)
and assigns roles to them: "Integrated" is the card with shared memory
(Intel Xe, AMD APU), "Graphics card" is any other - with two of them,
"Graphics card 1" and "Graphics card 2". The "Display" tab has two rows
of role buttons, one for the display and one for the decoder:

    Automatic  Graphics card  Integrated  Processor

Buttons without a matching card are left out; the tooltip names the
detected card with its memory and whether a display is connected to it.

Decoder: Automatic uses NVDEC (through FFmpeg's cuvid decoders) when an
NVIDIA card is present, otherwise D3D11VA on the card that draws,
otherwise software. "Graphics card" asks for the card (NVIDIA: NVDEC,
others: D3D11VA), "Integrated" for D3D11VA on the integrated graphics,
"Processor" for the CPU. In FFmpeg 9, D3D11VA handles only HEVC 4:2:0
and H.264 - with a 4:4:4 codec the client says so and decodes in
software; the codec can be changed in the "Picture" tab. A hardware
decoder that accepts packets but delivers no picture for 1.5 s, or only
unreadable ones, is replaced by software automatically; the reason is
shown in the statistics and in the log. The choice takes effect at once.
Command line: --decoder auto|gpu|gpu2|integriert|software (the old
values nvidia/nvdec/cuvid count as gpu).

Two NVIDIA cards: "Graphics card 1" and "Graphics card 2" decode on
exactly the selected card. CUDA numbers the cards differently from
Windows; the client matches them by LUID (log: "NVDEC: <Karte> ist
CUDA-Geraet n", i.e. the card is CUDA device n; --decodertest lists
"CUDA-Geraet n: <Karte>"). If the selected card cannot be matched, the
client would rather decode in software and name the reason than decode
on the wrong card. Automatic uses whatever CUDA lists as device 0.

Display: with a graphics card the client draws through Direct3D 11. The
raw planes from the decoder go to the card, conversion to RGB and
scaling run there in shaders (bit-identical to the processor path), and
the user interface sits on top as a separate layer. Frames are presented
immediately, with at most one frame in flight, never waiting. Automatic
takes the first card with a display output, otherwise the first NVIDIA
card, otherwise the first card at all; without a card the processor
path is used. At startup the client logs what it chose ("Anzeige: D3D11
<Karte>, ..." or "Anzeige: Software"). The choice in the menu is saved
and takes effect from the next start - until then a line below the
buttons shows "applies from the next start". Command line: --anzeige
auto|gpu|gpu2|integriert|cpu|warp and --adapter n; in einstellungen.txt
they can be set permanently as anzeige=... and decoder=... entries.

    quadchroma.exe --anzeigetest C:\ein\verzeichnis

checks the card without a connection: compiles the shaders, runs every
decoder format once through the card and compares the result with the
processor path (zero tolerance at 1:1), writes difference images to the
directory. Also runs without a card, on Windows' software rasterizer
(WARP). On the Mac the display is Metal, see "Mac client".

Mouse pointer: the pointer shown is always the Windows pointer - that is
what makes the mouse feel local. It takes the shape of the Mac pointer,
though: arrow, hand over buttons, resize arrows at window edges, text
cursor, spinning wait cursor. The host sends the shape only when it
changes. The pointer is never hidden here - macOS hides its pointer while
you type and keeps it hidden until the physical mouse moves, which,
driven from the client, it never does. The size follows the picture
scale: at 1:1 as large as on the host. The host sends the shape in
pixels of the stream: a Mac in a HiDPI mode is streamed natively, so its
pointer comes at twice its point size, drawn from the sharp 2x artwork
(1.5 times in a scaled mode such as "looks like 2560x1440" on a 4K
panel); the Windows host sends the shape of the Desktop Duplication,
whose pixels are the stream's. A host that fits its stream into the H.264
limit ("Stream size and H.264" under "Host display") scales the shape the
same way. The client
draws it exactly as large as the picture appears - shown width divided
by stream width: enlarged by whole factors, pixel for pixel (1.5 becomes
2, 1.4 stays 1), up to 256 pixels; reduced exactly, by area average,
when the picture appears smaller than the stream - a 4K stream in a
1920-pixel-wide picture halves it (a 64-pixel HiDPI pointer becomes 32
pixels), a Mac laptop's 3024-pixel-wide stream shown 1663 pixels wide
gets 0.55 (its 64-pixel pointer becomes 35 pixels, not 32) - but never
below 16 pixels. On the Mac client winit builds the pointer in points, so
the client also divides by the window's backing scale (2 on Retina); the
shape is then drawn at 1x resolution.

Everything else goes to the Mac. What is transmitted is the position of
the key, not the character, so umlauts and AltGr come out right without
any mapping. The Windows key is the Mac's Command key.

Host display
------------

The host streams exactly one display. Which one is set in the client's
menu: "Picture" tab, "Screen" row, above the codec buttons. The row has
an "Automatic" button and one button per display of the host with name,
size and refresh rate ("X27 X1 - 1920x1080 - 120 Hz"; in the program
with middle dots and a multiplication sign; without the Hz part if the
host does not know the rate; without a name, the identifier is shown).
The streamed display is shown in cyan; with Automatic, so is
"Automatic", and with a fixed choice, so is the chosen entry, provided
it is connected. A click on the entry that is already the requested one
does nothing (with Automatic, the streamed entry is not the requested
one - a click on it selects it as a fixed choice). Hovering the mouse
over the row shows: "Which of the host's screens you see. Automatic
follows the main screen; a fixed screen stays until you choose something
else." In all languages other than German and English the row is called
"<screen> of the host" (for example "Pantalla del host"), never the same
word as the "Display" tab.

After a click, the right end of the row shows "Switching screen ..." in
amber; with the menu closed, the same notice appears above the picture
as during a codec switch (if both are in progress, the box shows the
codec switch). It goes away as soon as the host answers with its list
and the request is fulfilled in it (with Automatic: the main display is
being streamed) or the requested display is not connected at all, after
5 s at the latest. If the requested display is not connected, the right
end of the row shows "<identifier> not connected - fallback: <name>" in
amber (in the program with an en dash). The row exists only with a host
that supports the choice (bit 1 of its capabilities, see below); an
older host never receives a request, and an older client ignores the
list.

Two modes, the same on both hosts:

    Automatic     Default. The host streams its main display - on the
                  Mac the one with the menu bar, on Windows the monitor
                  that Windows lists as primary - and follows it when it
                  changes: monitor connected, unplugged, switched in the
                  settings. Without a restart, without a new viewer.
    Fixed         The host streams the chosen display, recognized by
                  its identifier. If it goes away, the host streams the
                  main display as the fallback and tells the viewer
                  (list with the request, the amber notice in the
                  menu); when it comes back, the host switches back by
                  itself. The request stays until someone chooses
                  something else.

The reason: on 26 September a monitor had been connected to the Mac mini
and had become the main display. The host kept streaming the virtual
display chosen at startup, which had no windows on it - the picture was
empty, mouse and keyboard seemed dead. Now, in Automatic mode, the host
follows the main display; anyone who wants the virtual display selects
it as a fixed choice.

The mode is a state of the host, not of the client: the host has one
stream, the request applies to every viewer, the last request wins. The
identifier is stable, not a list position:

    Mac       v<Vendor>-m<Model>-s<Serial> from the display's numbers
              (for example v1138-m1234-s0); two identical ones in the
              list get -u<Unit> appended. The name is the display's
              name from System Settings (NSScreen), otherwise
              "Bildschirm <displayID>" (German for "display" plus its
              ID). The host reads the names into a cache: at startup,
              on every configuration change notification and every 5 s
              in the service loop. If AppKit does not know a new
              monitor yet at evaluation time, it first appears in the
              list as "Bildschirm <displayID>"; the name arrives with
              the next evaluation (request, configuration change
              notification, new viewer), and a changed name counts as
              a change of the list.
    Windows   the second part of the monitor's device ID (from
              MONITOR\ACR0501\{...}\0001 comes ACR0501); two identical
              ones get -<list position> appended, which can change when
              monitors are replugged. Without a device ID the device
              name (\\.\DISPLAYn) is used. The name is Windows' monitor
              name, otherwise the device description, otherwise the
              device name.

An identifier is at most 64 bytes, a name 48; anything longer is
truncated at a character boundary.

When the host re-evaluates: at startup, on every request, on every
capture start (new viewer, recovery) and on every change of the
displays. macOS reports such changes to the Mac host immediately; it
re-evaluates 300 ms after the last notification (debounced - three
notifications in quick succession are one change). The Windows host
role re-enumerates its outputs in the capture thread every 2 s, and
immediately after losing the Duplication; a monitor change is therefore
noticed there after about 2 s. The target is the requested display if
it is connected, otherwise the main display, otherwise the first one in
the list, otherwise none ("no display", message 9). If the target
differs from the streamed display, the host switches; without a viewer
it only remembers the target, and the stream starts only with the next
viewer.

The switch works like a codec switch, in the stream's thread: stop the
old stream, take the stream size from the new display (Mac: native, see
"Stream size on the Mac" below, --out takes precedence; Windows: the
output's full size, kept even; on both fitted into the H.264 limit while
H.264 runs), open a new encoder if the size differs,
then send the viewer message 7 (SWITCH with the current codec - the
client rebuilds its decoder), message 1 (INFO with the dimensions), the
new list (12) and then the first frame as a keyframe; the mouse follows
the picture. On the wire the list therefore comes before the keyframe:
the Windows host role sends it right after setting up the Duplication,
before the encoder opens; the Mac host right after the new stream has
started successfully, and ScreenCaptureKit delivers the first frame
after that (the hosttest checks the sequence 7 1 12). 7 and 1 are sent
even when the size stays the same. The encoder then stays in place on
the Mac; on Windows only an encoder on the processor path, and only if
the new capture takes the processor path as well - an encoder on the
texture path (its pool is tied to the device of the old Duplication) is
reopened on every switch, even at the same size. The last frame of the
old display is dropped; the first frame afterwards always comes from the
new one. The picture freezes briefly during the switch (Mac: stopping
and restarting the stream; Windows: new Duplication, new encoder where
it does not stay in place). The client also rebuilds its decoder on an
INFO with new dimensions and waits for a keyframe ("Strominfo: neue
Groesse BxH (vorher BxH) - Decoder neu, warte auf Vollbild" in
protokoll.txt). If a codec switch is in progress, the display switch
waits until it has finished: the Mac host checks every 200 ms and
switches anyway after 5 s; meanwhile every request gets the list as an
immediate answer, and once more after the switch. If the new stream
fails, the fallback path for a display loss applies (message 9, new
attempt: Mac after 2 s, Windows every 2 s) - on the Mac only with a
viewer; without a viewer only the target is kept for the next one. If
macOS temporarily reports no display at all, the stream keeps running.

A display loss is not a switch: if the streamed display is unplugged,
the stream ends and the host sets it up again - on the display chosen at
that point, that is, with a fixed request, on the fallback. Mac:
ScreenCaptureKit reports the end ("Aufnahme gestoppt: <Fehler> (Code
<n>)", capture stopped); with a viewer, message 9 follows and after 2 s
the recovery: a new choice ("Bildschirm gewaehlt: ... -
Ausweichplatz"), a new stream without a "Bildschirmwechsel" line
(display switch), SWITCH and INFO only if the stream size differs, then
the list, message 9 withdrawn and "Aufnahme wiederhergestellt: ...".
Without a display, "Kein Bildschirm - warte auf seine Rueckkehr" (no
display, waiting for it to return) appears once, then an attempt every
3 s; if the start fails, "Aufnahme: neuer Versuch in 3 s". If macOS's
configuration change notification arrives before the stream ends, it is
an ordinary switch with a line ("Ausweichplatz", fallback, or
"Hauptbildschirm gewechselt", main display changed). Windows host role:
the Duplication reports the loss ("Aufnahme verloren: <Fehler> -
Nachricht 9, neuer Versuch alle 2 s"), the outputs are re-enumerated at
once - if there is a new target, "Bildschirmwechsel: <alt> -> <neu>
(Ausweichplatz) - ohne laufenden Strom nur das Ziel, gilt ab dem
naechsten Aufbau" (without a running stream only the target is set; it
applies from the next setup) is logged and the list goes out right away;
if the list is empty, only "Kein Bildschirm - warte auf seine
Rueckkehr" -, and the setup attempt every 2 s takes the target: SWITCH
and INFO as soon as it is a different display (INFO also on a different
size), then "Aufnahme wiederhergestellt: ..." (capture restored) and a
keyframe.

Stream size on the Mac: the host streams exactly the pixels the display
is set to, never halved (decision of 29 September 2026: native as the
basis). The pixels are those of the display mode, in a HiDPI mode the
pixels behind the points:

    3840x2160 (native 4K panel mode)              -> 3840x2160
    "looks like 1920x1080" (HiDPI) on a 4K panel  -> 3840x2160
    1920x1080 without HiDPI on a 4K panel         -> 1920x1080
    "looks like 2560x1440" (HiDPI) on a 4K panel  -> 3840x2160
    "looks like 2560x1440" on a 5K panel          -> 5120x2880

A scaled HiDPI mode renders more pixels than the panel has ("looks like
2560x1440" draws 5120x2880 and hands 3840x2160 to the panel); the host
then streams the panel's resolution, keeping the aspect ratio - more
than that is not visible on the Mac either. The panel's resolution is
the larger of the largest mode without HiDPI (pixels = points) and the
largest mode macOS marks as native: a display whose EDID prefers
1920x1080 marks only that as native but may run 3840x2160 without HiDPI,
and a built-in Retina panel may offer its full resolution only as a
HiDPI mode. Only a scaled HiDPI mode is capped; a mode without HiDPI is
streamed exactly as set. Odd sizes lose one pixel. --out <B>x<H> takes
precedence over all of this, for a smaller stream. If the streamed display changes
its mode while a viewer watches (another resolution, HiDPI on or off),
the stream follows like a display switch - new encoder, SWITCH, INFO,
keyframe - with the reason "Aufloesung geaendert: Strom <B>x<H> ->
<B>x<H>" (resolution changed). A mode with the same pixels and other
points (3840x2160 against "looks like 1920x1080") keeps the stream and
only changes the pointer scale. The mouse is unaffected: the host maps
the client's position onto the display in points. Measured on the M1
(VideoToolbox, every frame different, at most two frames in flight):
3840x2160 HEVC 4:4:4 10 bit 85 frames/s, 4:4:4 8 bit 91, 4:2:0 10 bit
89, 4:2:0 8 bit 96; 1920x1080 HEVC 4:4:4 10 bit 187.

Stream size and H.264 (both hosts): H.264 has a size limit - at most
4096 pixels per side and 36864 macroblocks (4096x2304, level 5.2). The
M1's hardware H.264 encoder opens up to 4096 per side and refuses
4112x2304, 5120x1440, 5120x2880 and 6016x3384 (measured, error -12903);
NVENC H.264 stops at 4096x4096, and many hardware decoders stop at level
5.2. HEVC has no such limit here (the M1 opens 6016x3384). While H.264
runs and the native size is larger than the limit, the host fits the
stream into it, keeping the aspect ratio - the only exception to native:

    5120x2880 (5K)                 -> 4096x2304 with H.264
    6016x3384 (6K)                 -> 4096x2304 with H.264
    5120x1440 (super ultrawide)    -> 4096x1152 with H.264
    2880x5120 (5K in portrait)     -> 2304x4096 with H.264
    3840x2160, 3840x2400, 4096x2304   stay native with H.264

The log says so once per size: "Stromgroesse: <B>x<H> ist fuer H.264 zu
gross (hoechstens 4096 Bildpunkte je Seite und 36864 Makrobloecke) -
eingepasst auf <B>x<H> bei gleichem Seitenverhaeltnis, die einzige
Ausnahme von nativ" (too large for H.264, fitted). Start, recovery,
display switch, a new resolution and the codec switch all use this one
rule: a switch between HEVC and H.264 that changes the size logs
"Stromgroesse: <B>x<H> -> <B>x<H> (fuer H.264 eingepasst)" or "(wieder
nativ)", reconfigures the capture and sends SWITCH, then INFO with the
new size and a keyframe, like a display switch; the pointer shape gets
the new scale. If the new codec does not open, the old one comes back at
the old size. The Mac captures directly at the fitted size
(ScreenCaptureKit scales); the Windows host role scales on the CPU
(area average, "Null-Kopien-Weg: der fuer H.264 eingepasste Strom wird
auf dem Prozessor skaliert - Prozessorweg (bgra)" when zero-copy was
chosen). The capability probe opens H.264 at 4096x2304 too ("H.264 High
ja (Hardware), bis 4096x2304 geprueft - groessere Bildschirme werden
eingepasst"); if the encoder refuses that size, the limit becomes
1920x1080 and larger streams are fitted into it.

bildschirm.txt: the request is stored in the host's data folder, exactly
one line, "auto" or the identifier:

    Mac       ~/Library/Application Support/QuadChroma/bildschirm.txt
    Windows   %APPDATA%\QuadChroma\bildschirm.txt

Written on every request from the menu (first to a temporary file next
to it, which is then renamed; the Windows host role removes leftover
bildschirm.*.neu files at startup), read at startup. If the file is
missing, Automatic applies without a message; if it is unreadable or
damaged (empty, more than one line, not UTF-8, control characters, over
64 bytes), Automatic applies with the line "Bildschirmwahl: bildschirm.txt
unlesbar - Automatik", and the file stays as it is - it is never replaced
silently. Editing it by hand works too, while the host is not running.

--display N (Mac) or --output n (Windows host role) pins, for this run,
the display at position N of --list as the request (its identifier is
remembered as soon as the list has been read once), without changing
bildschirm.txt; a request from the menu overrides the pin and is saved.
A position out of range produces a log line, and then the file or
Automatic applies. --list shows for each display the identifier, name,
size, refresh rate and which one is the main display.

Test mode: --bildschirm <identifier|auto> sends the request once, as
soon as the input channel is up and the host has reported that it
supports the choice ("Bildschirmwunsch gesendet: <Kennung|auto>"; with
a host without bit 1 it is not sent: "Bildschirmwunsch nicht gesendet:
der Host kennt keine Bildschirmwahl"). Every list from the host produces
a line ([Haupt] = main display, [gestreamt] = streamed), in window mode
in protokoll.txt:

    "Bildschirme des Hosts (Wunsch <Kennung|Automatik>): <Name>
     <Kennung> <B>x<H> <Hz> Hz [Haupt] [gestreamt]; ..."
                                        (no entries: "...: keine")

The status line every three seconds carries, after the codec, the field
"| Strom <B>x<H>@<fps>" (stream width x height @ frame rate; "?" without
stream information - also right after connecting, the dimensions of a
previous host do not linger), so that a switch is visible even when the
codec stays the same. --eingabeprobe waits for the switch: the probe
goes out only once the request has been sent and answered by the host
(a list with the request; without an answer, after 5 s), and quits the
client about 2 s later. The mouse therefore lands on the requested
display (see "The menu").

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --bildschirm v0-m0-s0
    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --bildschirm auto

Log lines of the Mac host (host-protokoll.txt); <Text> is
'Kennung <n> (<Kennung>) "<Name>"' (<n> is the macOS display ID), for
example 'Kennung 2 (v1138-m1234-s0) "X27 X1"'. Placeholders: <Kennung>
identifier, <B>x<H> width x height, <alt>/<neu> old/new, <Grund>
reason, <Fehler> error:

    "Bildschirmwahl: Wunsch <Kennung> aus bildschirm.txt"
    "Bildschirmwahl: bildschirm.txt unlesbar - Automatik"
    "Bildschirm --display N: <Text> gilt als Wunsch fuer diesen Lauf"
    "Bildschirm N nicht verfuegbar (M in der Liste) - Automatik" or
     "... - der Wunsch aus bildschirm.txt gilt"
    "Bildschirm <Text>: <Masse>, <Hz> Hz -> <B>x<H>, <fps> fps
     - Automatik (folgt dem Hauptbildschirm)" or "... - Wunsch
     <Kennung>"                                 (at service start)
    "Bildschirm gewaehlt: <Text>, <B>x<H> Pixel, <Hz> Hz
     [ (Hauptbildschirm)][ - Ausweichplatz]"       (once per target)
    "Aufnahme gestartet: Bildschirm <Masse>, <Hz> Hz, <Text> -> <B>x<H>"
     for example, 4K panel in "looks like 1920x1080":
     "Aufnahme gestartet: Bildschirm 3840x2160 (HiDPI, wie 1920x1080),
     120 Hz, Kennung 2 (v1138-m1234-s0) "X27 X1" -> 3840x2160"
    "Zeigerform: Massstab <m> (Strom <B> Bildpunkte breit, Bildschirm
     <P> Punkte)"      (pointer scale, when it changes: 2.00 for HiDPI,
                        1.60 for a 5K panel fitted for H.264)
    "Stromgroesse: <B>x<H> ist fuer H.264 zu gross (...) - eingepasst
     auf <B>x<H> ..." and "Stromgroesse: <B>x<H> -> <B>x<H> (fuer
     H.264 eingepasst|wieder nativ)"          (see "Stream size and H.264")
    "Bildschirmwunsch: <Kennung|Automatik>" (plus " - bildschirm.txt
     liess sich nicht schreiben" if saving fails)
    "Bildschirmwunsch: <Kennung> - nicht angeschlossen, Ausweichplatz
     <Text>"
    "Bildschirmwunsch ungueltig (<n> Byte) - uebergangen"
    "Bildschirmwunsch <Kennung|Automatik> verworfen: Aufnahme laeuft
     noch nicht"
    "Bildschirmwechsel: <alt> -> <neu> (<Grund>)" with the reasons
     "Wunsch des Zuschauers" (viewer's request), "Wunsch des
     Zuschauers: Automatik" (the viewer switched to Automatic),
     "Hauptbildschirm gewechselt" (main display changed),
     "Ausweichplatz" (fallback), "zurueck zum gewuenschten
     Bildschirm" (back to the requested display) and "Aufloesung
     geaendert: Strom <B>x<H> -> <B>x<H>" (same display, other mode)
    "Bildschirmwechsel: <alt> -> <neu> (<Grund>) nicht vollzogen"
     (plus " - Ausweichweg wie beim Bildschirmverlust" if a viewer is
     present; without a viewer only the target is kept)
    "Bildschirmwechsel auf <Text> wartet auf den laufenden Codecwechsel"
    "Codecwechsel nach 5 s nicht fertig - Bildschirmwechsel trotzdem"
    "Bildschirme nicht abrufbar - der Stand bleibt"
    "Kein Bildschirm in der Liste - der laufende Strom bleibt"
    "Kein Bildschirm - Abbruch"                              (at startup)
    "Aufnahme gestoppt: <Fehler> (Code <n>)"             (display loss)
    "Kein Bildschirm - warte auf seine Rueckkehr"
    "Aufnahme: neuer Versuch in 3 s"
    "Aufnahme wiederhergestellt: Bildschirm <Masse>, <Hz> Hz, <Text> ->
     <B>x<H>"

"Aufnahme gestartet" and "Aufnahme wiederhergestellt" end with " (nativ
<B>x<H>, fuer H.264 eingepasst)" while the stream is fitted for H.264.

<Masse> is the display's pixel size, "<B>x<H>", in a HiDPI mode followed
by " (HiDPI, wie <b>x<h>)" (its size in points), and with ", Panel
<B>x<H>" (or " (Panel <B>x<H>)") when the mode has more pixels than the
panel.

--list writes for each display "Display N: id=<n>, Kennung <Kennung>,
Name "<Name>", <Masse> Pixel, <Hz> Hz  (Hauptbildschirm), Strom <B>x<H>
[ (mit H.264 <B>x<H>)], EDR-Kopfraum ..." - Strom is the size the host
would stream, the part in brackets the size with H.264 when it differs.

Log lines of the Windows host role (host-protokoll.txt); <Text> is
"<Kennung> (<Name>)", for example "ACR0501 (X27 X1)":

    "Ausgang N: \\.\DISPLAYn <B>x<H> bei (x,y)  an Karte K (<Karte>)
     [ (Hauptbildschirm)]  Kennung <Kennung> (<Name>), <Hz> Hz"
                                                  (start and --list)
    "Bildschirmwahl: Automatik (bildschirm.txt)" or
     "Bildschirmwahl: <Kennung> (bildschirm.txt)"
    "Bildschirmwahl: bildschirm.txt unlesbar - Automatik"
    "Bildschirmwahl: N liegengebliebene temporaere Datei(en)
     bildschirm.*.neu entfernt"
    "Bildschirmwahl: Wunsch nicht gespeichert (<Grund>)" or
     "Bildschirmwahl: kein Ablageordner - Wunsch nicht gespeichert"
    "--output n: Bildschirm <Text> gilt fuer diesen Lauf (bildschirm.txt
     bleibt)"
    "Ausgang n nicht verfuegbar (M in der Liste) - kein Pin, es gilt
     bildschirm.txt bzw. der Hauptbildschirm"
    "Ausgang gewaehlt: \\.\DISPLAYn <B>x<H> bei (x,y) an Karte K
     [ (Hauptbildschirm)], Kennung <Kennung> (<Name>), <Hz> Hz
     [ - gewuenschter Bildschirm | - Ausweichplatz, <Kennung> nicht
     angeschlossen]"
    "Bildschirmwunsch: <Kennung>" or "Bildschirmwunsch: Automatik"
     (plus " (laeuft bereits)" when there is nothing to switch)
    "Bildschirmwunsch: <Kennung> - nicht angeschlossen, Ausweichplatz
     <Text>"
    "Bildschirmwunsch: <Kennung|Automatik> - <Grund>, kein Wechsel
     moeglich"          (without capture: canned source, no DXGI
                         output, no encoder; the answer is the old
                         list)
    "Bildschirmwunsch: ungueltig (<n> Byte) - uebergangen"
    "Bildschirmwechsel: <alt> -> <neu> (<Grund>)" with the same five
     reasons; as long as no Duplication is set up - no viewer, or a
     loss in progress -, with the suffix " - ohne laufenden Strom nur
     das Ziel, gilt ab dem naechsten Aufbau". Only between two
     displays: if the list is empty or becomes empty, there is no
     line.
    "Aufnahme verloren: <Fehler> - Nachricht 9, neuer Versuch alle 2 s"
    "Kein Bildschirm - warte auf seine Rueckkehr"
    "Aufnahme wiederhergestellt: \\.\DISPLAYn <B>x<H> an Karte K
     (<Karte>), Format ..., Strom <B>x<H> (nativ), Quelle
     Textur|Prozessorweg"               (like "Aufnahme gestartet: ...";
                                         " (nativ <B>x<H>, fuer H.264
                                         eingepasst)" while fitted)
    "Stromgroesse: ..." and "Zeigerform: Massstab <m> (Strom <B>
     Bildpunkte breit, Desktop <B>)" as on the Mac (see "Stream size
     and H.264")
    "Ausgaenge: <Fehler> - die letzte Liste gilt weiter", later
     "Ausgaenge: wieder aufzaehlbar"

Wire messages (header as everywhere else):

    12  Displays      Host -> Client, video channel: u8 version (1), u8
                      count (0 to 16), u8 length of the request (0 =
                      Automatic), u8 0, the identifier of the request
                      (even if that display is not connected at the
                      moment), then per entry u8 identifier length (1
                      to 64), u8 name length (0 to 48), u16 width, u16
                      height in pixels, u16 Hz (0 = unknown), u8 flags
                      (bit 0 main display, bit 1 being streamed), u8 0,
                      identifier, name (UTF-8). At most 2020 bytes. Sent
                      to every new viewer right after the capabilities
                      (11), after every switch, after every change of
                      the list and as the answer to every request,
                      including one that cannot be fulfilled. The
                      client reads cautiously: an unknown version or
                      malformed bytes leave the last good list in
                      place, more than 16 entries are cut to 16.
    70  Request       Client -> Host, input channel: u8 identifier
                      length (0 = Automatic, otherwise 1 to 64), then
                      the identifier - at most 65 bytes (on the hosts'
                      input channel the limit of 256 bytes applies, as
                      for all small types). The host ignores invalid
                      data (length, not UTF-8, control characters), and
                      the channel stays open. State message: if the
                      input channel comes up only later, the client
                      sends the last request then. Sent only to a host
                      that has reported bit 1 in this session.

Bit 1 in the capabilities (11) is called "Bildschirmwahl" (display
selection); both hosts report 7 (files, display selection and, from 0.2.0
on, HDR negotiation - see "HDR"). In its own capabilities (69) the client
still reports only bit 0.

Test vector: the list with Automatic, "X27 X1" (v1138-m1234-s0,
1920x1080, 120 Hz, main and streamed) and "Virtuell 16:9" (v0-m0-s0,
1920x1080, 240 Hz) is

    01 02 00 00
    0e 06 80 07 38 04 78 00 03 00  76 31 31 33 38 2d 6d 31 32 33 34
    2d 73 30  58 32 37 20 58 31
    08 0d 80 07 38 04 f0 00 00 00  76 30 2d 6d 30 2d 73 30  56 69 72
    74 75 65 6c 6c 20 31 36 3a 39

the request for v0-m0-s0 is "08 76 30 2d 6d 30 2d 73 30", Automatic
"00". Both hosts and the client generate and parse these bytes in their
tests; the Mac host's hosttest (section Bildschirm) plays through the
switching with stand-ins for the list and the stream and with real
encoders, the tests of the Windows host role cover the choice, the
identifiers, bildschirm.txt, the request over the real input channel
and the greeting with 3 and 12.

Verified on real hardware (26 September 2026, Windows client against
the Mac host with two displays): request for the second display with
switch, list and stream, the mouse via --eingabeprobe on the requested
display, back with "auto", bildschirm.txt. Not yet verified on real
hardware, only in test harnesses and in the code: for the Windows host
role the switch itself (new Duplication, Switch, Info, keyframe, list
afterwards; at the same size the encoder on the processor path stays in
place) - it needs two real outputs, and the VM has one -, and there also
identifier, name and refresh rate from real monitors; for the Mac host
the main display switch live, including names from AppKit.

HDR
---

From 0.2.0 on the stream can be HDR10: HEVC with BT.2020 primaries, the PQ
curve (SMPTE ST 2084) and the BT.2020 matrix (non-constant luminance), 10
bits, in the full range like every QuadChroma stream - in HEVC 4:4:4 10 bit
(candidate 0) and HEVC 4:2:0 10 bit (candidate 2). Mastering values travel in
the stream information (message 1) and as prefix SEI 137 and 144 before every
keyframe (for recordings and other players). Everything else is the SDR
stream as before; with HLG, dynamic metadata (HDR10+, Dolby Vision), 8 bit
and H.264 the stream stays SDR, and the mouse pointer is always SDR.

The host decides alone, per viewer and anew on every change; the client only
reports its screen and its wish. HDR runs only if all of this holds (in this
order, the first failing point is the reason in message 1, byte 13):

    7  no message 71 from the client (a client before 0.2.0, or not yet)
    1  the HDR switch is off
    2  the codec is not HEVC 10 bit
    4  the host cannot: Mac before macOS 15 or its encoder refuses the
       HDR10 properties; Windows without an NVENC that opens HDR10
    3  the host's streamed screen is SDR: Mac without EDR headroom on that
       screen (an XDR display, an HDR monitor with HDR on, a virtual
       display with HDR); Windows without "Use HDR" on that output
    5  the client cannot show HDR (drawing on the CPU, or DXGI refused HDR10
       on that screen)
    1  the client's screen is SDR
    0  HDR active

and 6 when the switch to HDR failed (the host then stays with the same
candidate in SDR until the situation changes). Every session starts in SDR;
the switch to HDR10 is a codec switch with color as a second dimension:
capture in the new mode, new encoder session, message 7 (SWITCH, byte 6 the
transfer), message 1 (stream info), keyframe. The picture stands still for a
blink. At most one color switch every 2 s; a later reason waits for the end
of that lock.

HDR switch. In the menu, "Picture" tab, to the right of "Sound": "HDR", on
(the default) or off. On means HDR whenever both sides can, off always SDR.
It is stored per host (by fingerprint) with the other values of the tab and
acts at once (message 71 with the new wish, without debouncing). Next to it
the client shows its state:

    active on both sides          the host sends PQ and this window really
                                  shows HDR (Windows: HDR10 swapchain; Mac:
                                  EDR with headroom above SDR white)
    HDR -> SDR - this screen shows it as SDR
                                  the host sends PQ, this screen maps it
    SDR - <reason>                "this screen is SDR", "needs HEVC 10-bit",
                                  "the host's screen is SDR", "the host
                                  cannot send HDR", "this display cannot
                                  show HDR", "switching to HDR failed",
                                  "negotiating ...", "the host has no HDR
                                  (older version)"
    off - always SDR              the switch is off

(in the program with an arrow, a middle dot and an en dash). Only "active on
both sides" is golden: the switch glows golden with moving sparkles, a
golden sparkling "HDR" badge with "HDR10 - PQ" below it stands over the
picture for about three seconds when HDR becomes active, and the statistics
(F9) show the line "Color" (below "Codec") as "HDR10 - PQ" in gold (nerd
mode: "HDR10 - PQ - <peak> nit" with the peak of the source). One side alone is never golden;
the color line then reads "HDR -> SDR", otherwise "SDR" (nerd mode with the
reason). The golden state is the same on both clients - the interface is
drawn by QuadChroma itself. Hovering over the switch shows: "HDR10 whenever
both sides can: the host's screen and this screen show HDR. Off: always SDR.
Saved for this host."

Brightness. The working space is linear light relative to the host's SDR
white: the host's SDR white becomes the SDR white of the client's screen, so
desktop text looks as bright as locally. Everything brighter is mapped onto
the headroom of the client's screen (headroom = peak / SDR white of the
screen, on the Mac the current EDR headroom) with a smooth knee at SDR white;
if the source fits the headroom, nothing is mapped. On an SDR screen
everything above SDR white is clipped, keeping the hue (the largest of R, G,
B becomes white, the others keep their ratio); SDR content of an HDR source
therefore comes out exactly as in SDR. The host's SDR white: Mac 203 nit
(the level BT.2408 gives and VideoToolbox uses; overridable with
QC_HDR_SDR_WEISS, see below), Windows the SDR content brightness slider
(SDRWhiteLevel, followed every 2 s). The peak: MaxCLL, otherwise the
mastering peak, otherwise 1000 nit.

The client's side:

    Windows   The screen of the window counts as HDR when "Use HDR" is on
              there (DXGI reports G2084/P2020); read at start of the
              session, every 2 s, and at once when the window moves to
              another monitor. A PQ picture on an HDR screen: the swapchain
              becomes R10G10B10A2 with G2084/P2020 and HDR10 metadata; the
              codes go through unchanged when the SDR white of both sides
              differs by at most 1 nit and the source fits the headroom,
              otherwise they are mapped as above. On an SDR screen the
              swapchain stays B8G8R8A8 and the picture is mapped to SDR.
              The swapchain switches at most every 0.5 s. If DXGI refuses
              HDR10 on a screen, the client reports "cannot show HDR" until
              the screen changes (the host then sends SDR).
    Mac       The screen of the window counts as HDR when its potential EDR
              headroom is above 1 (an XDR display, an HDR monitor with HDR
              on). A PQ picture there switches the Metal layer to EDR
              (RGBA16Float, extended linear Display P3; from macOS 26 with
              preferredDynamicRange High and contentsHeadroom), and the
              picture follows the current headroom - also without a new
              frame, after EDR switched on, a brightness change or a move to
              another screen. EDR is on only while a PQ stream is shown.
              Elsewhere the picture is mapped to SDR in the existing 8-bit
              path.
    Both      The decision per frame comes from the frame itself (the VUI of
              the decoded picture), not from a message - there is no race
              with message 7. Drawing on the CPU maps PQ pictures to SDR too
              and reports "cannot show HDR".

The host's side:

    Mac       macOS 15 or later: at start the host opens a test session of
              candidates 0 and 2 with the HDR10 properties ("HDR10 (BT.2020/
              PQ)" in the capability lines). With HDR the capture is
              ScreenCaptureKit in HDR (canonical dynamic range, Display P3
              with PQ, matrix BT.709 - VideoToolbox converts P3 to BT.2020,
              byte 5 of message 7 and the log say so); 4:4:4 at 10 bits stays
              copy-free. The encoder writes BT.2020/PQ/BT.2020 into the VUI,
              the host adds SEI 137 (mastering: Display P3 D65, 1000 nit,
              0.005 nit) and 144 (MaxCLL/MaxFALL 0: unknown for a screen)
              after the PPS of every keyframe. HDR on or off at the streamed
              screen is noticed via the display callbacks, at the latest
              after 5 s through the EDR headroom.
    Windows   On a desktop with "Use HDR" the Desktop Duplication delivers
              FP16 (scRGB). For an HDR10 stream the converter on the GPU
              turns it into PQ planes (4:4:4 YUV444P16LE or 4:2:0 P010,
              rotation included) for NVENC, with the mastering
              values from the output (GetDesc1) as side data, so that NVENC
              writes SEI 137/144 itself. For an SDR stream the same converter
              maps it to SDR (BGRA8, clipped at SDR white keeping the hue)
              - before 0.2.0 such a desktop could not be streamed at all.
              "HDR10: ja" or "HDR10: nein (<reason>)" per candidate in the
              encoder lines at start.

Environment variables of the Mac host (for the acceptance tests of step G0,
not needed in normal use):

    QC_HDR_AUFNAHME    kanonisch-p3 (default), lokal-p3, kanonisch-2100,
                       lokal-2100: dynamic range canonical or local, color
                       space Display P3 PQ with matrix BT.709 or BT.2100 PQ
                       with matrix BT.2020 (then without conversion)
    QC_HDR_SDR_WEISS   SDR white of the capture in nit (50 to 1000, default
                       203), sent in message 1

scripts/hdrprobe.sh (with scripts/hdrprobe.m) measures on a Mac host what
ScreenCaptureKit delivers in HDR, outside the app: "messen" (the four capture
modes, attachments, the code of a white SDR window - that is SDR white in
nit), "spitze" (the maximum with an HDR video on screen) and "beobachten"
(what happens when HDR is switched on and off). It needs the Screen
Recording permission for the terminal and writes its report to
build/hdrprobe-*.txt. The host itself still has --capture <s> <file> --hdr:
a recording in HDR10 if the Mac can, otherwise in SDR with a line.

Wire messages (header as everywhere else):

    1   INFO      Host -> Client, version 1 is 24 bytes. Bytes 0 to 7 as
                  before (u16 width, u16 height, u16 fps, u8 codec, u8
                  format), then u8 version (1), u8 transfer after H.273 (1
                  SDR, 16 PQ, 18 HLG reserved), u8 primaries (1 BT.709, 9
                  BT.2020), u8 matrix (1 BT.709, 9 BT.2020 NCL), u8 full
                  range (1), u8 reason (see above), u16 SDR white of the host
                  in nit, u16 mastering peak in nit, u16 mastering minimum in
                  0.0001 nit, u16 MaxCLL, u16 MaxFALL (little endian, 0 =
                  unknown). A host before 0.2.0 sends only the 8 bytes; a
                  client reads another version like 8 bytes (color from the
                  stream, SDR white 203 nit, peak 1000 nit). Sent at the
                  start, after every switch, and when only the reason
                  changes ("neue Strominfo" in the host log).
    7   SWITCH    byte 6 is the transfer (1 SDR, 16 PQ; hosts before 0.2.0
                  send 0 = SDR), for the log only.
    11  capabilities: bit 2 (value 4) "HDR-Aushandlung" (HDR negotiation):
                  the host understands message 71 and sends version 1 of
                  message 1. Both hosts report 7.
    71  Display   Client -> Host, input channel, 14 bytes, a state message
                  (sent again when the input channel comes up), only to a
                  host with bit 2 in this session: u8 version (1), u8 flags
                  (bit 0 the screen of the window is HDR, bit 1 the client
                  can show HDR), u8 wish (0 Automatic, 1 Off, 2 Always), u8
                  0, u16 SDR white of the screen in nit, u16 peak, u16
                  full-frame peak, u16 potential headroom x 100, u16 current
                  headroom x 100 (0 = unknown). Sent at the start of every
                  session, and when flags or wish change (at most once per
                  second; the HDR switch at once) - brightness and headroom
                  alone do not trigger it. The hosts skip invalid lengths.

Test vectors (bytes 8 to 23 of message 1, and message 71):

    PQ, reason 0, white 203, mastering 1000 / 0.005 nit:
        01 10 09 09 01 00 cb 00 e8 03 32 00 00 00 00 00
    SDR, reason 7:
        01 01 01 01 01 07 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00
    71, HDR and can show, Automatic, 240 / 1015 / 600 nit, headroom 4.23:
        01 03 00 00 f0 00 f7 03 58 02 a7 01 a7 01

client/src/hdr_vektoren.txt holds these and the whole truth table of the
decision; the Rust tests and host/hdr.c (the C mirror of the Mac host) check
against the same file.

Log lines of the client (protokoll.txt; in test mode on the console):

    "Strominfo Fassung 1: PQ/BT.2020, Weiss <n> nit, Mastering <min>-<max>
     nit, MaxCLL <n>, MaxFALL <n>" or "Strominfo Fassung 1: SDR/BT.709,
     Grund <n> (<Grund>)"                          (on every change)
    "Strominfo ohne Farbangabe (Host vor 0.2.0 oder fremde Fassung): Farbe
     aus dem Strom"
    "IN_ANZEIGE an den Host: Schirm HDR|SDR, Darstellung ja|nein, Wunsch
     Automatisch|Aus, Weiss <n> nit, Spitze <n> nit, Vollbild <n> nit,
     Kopfraum <p>/<a>"
    "Bildschirm des Fensters: HDR|SDR, SDR-Weiss <n> nit, Spitze <n> nit,
     Kopfraum <p> (jetzt <a>)"
    "HDR-Schalter an (Automatisch)" or "HDR-Schalter aus (immer SDR)"
    "HDR auf beiden Seiten aktiv (Host PQ, Anzeige HDR)"
    "Erstes Bild aus hevc: ... Farbe PQ/BT.2020"
    "VideoToolbox: <B>x<H> HEVC 4:4:4 10 Bit, PQ/BT.2020, Hardware ja, ..."
                                                                     (Mac)
    "Anzeige: Swapchain HDR10 (R10G10B10A2, G2084/P2020), Weiss Quelle <n>
     nit, Schirm <n> nit, Kopfraum Quelle <h>, Schirm <h>, Durchreichen
     ja|nein" and "Anzeige: HDR10-Metadaten: Spitze <n> nit, ..."
                                                                 (Windows)
    "Anzeige: Umschalten auf HDR10|SDR gescheitert: <Fehler>"   (Windows)
    "Anzeige: Schicht auf EDR umgestellt (RGBA16Float, erweitert linear
     Display P3, ...)" and "Anzeige: HDR-Strom (...) auf einem EDR-Schirm:
     ..., abgebildet auf den Kopfraum <h>; ..."                     (Mac)

Log lines of both hosts (host-protokoll.txt):

    "IN_ANZEIGE: Schirm ..., Darstellung ..., Wunsch ..." (as above; Mac:
     "IN_ANZEIGE: Schirm HDR|SDR, Darstellung ja|nein, Wunsch <n>, ...")
    "IN_ANZEIGE: ungueltig (<n> Byte) - uebergangen"
    "HDR-Entscheidung (<Anlass>): ..." with the occasion (IN_ANZEIGE, HDR
     am Host, Desktop jetzt HDR|SDR, Codecwechsel, nach der Sperre, ...):
     a switch "Farbwechsel SDR -> HDR10" (Mac) or "Wechsel nach HDR10 (PQ)
     angefordert" (Windows), "der letzte Farbwechsel ist keine 2 s her, in
     <s> s", or only a new reason "- vorher Grund <n> (<Grund>), neue
     Strominfo"
    "Wechsel nach HDR10 gescheitert - nur noch SDR (Grund 6), bis sich die
     Lage aendert" (Mac), "HDR10-Sitzung fuer <Kandidat> scheitert
     (<Fehler>) - derselbe Kandidat in SDR (Grund 6)" (Windows)
    "Bildschirm des Hosts: HDR an|aus (EDR-Kopfraum <h>) - <Anlass>" (Mac)
    "HDR-Desktop <Name>: SDR-Weiss <a> -> <b> nit" (Windows, the slider)
    "Aufnahme <Name>: HDR-Desktop, aber die Duplication liefert kein FP16 -
     kein HDR10 (Windows bildet selbst nach SDR ab)" (Windows)

Test mode: the status line every three seconds carries, after the stream,
the field "| Farbe <state>" with the text of the color line in the
statistics (English, nerd mode) and "(gold)" when the window would glow
golden - for example "Farbe HDR10 - PQ - 1000 nit (gold)", "Farbe HDR -> SDR"
or "Farbe SDR - the host cannot send HDR". Without a window the client shows
nothing in HDR and reports no screen, so a host sends SDR with reason 7.
--hdr-schirm hdr|sdr imagines a screen: the client reports it in message 71
as a window would (hdr: HDR screen, SDR white 203 nit, peak 1000 nit; sdr:
SDR screen; both "can show HDR", wish Automatic), and with "hdr" it counts
as showing every PQ frame in HDR. That checks the negotiation and the golden
state end to end without HDR hardware:

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --hdr-schirm hdr

The Windows host role with --konserve <file> and an HDR10 clip (HEVC with
PQ/BT.2020 in the VUI, MDCV and CLL as SEI) sends it as PQ with the stream
information version 1 from the clip, without negotiation - the only place
that does so, a test path for the clients without an HDR encoder.

Verified in test harnesses and on the build VM, not yet on real HDR
screens: the decision and the bytes in Rust and C (hdr_vektoren.txt), the
Mac host up to HDR10 and back in hosttest with the real VideoToolbox encoder
and decoder, the converter of the Windows host role on WARP (PQ planes
against hdr.rs, all rotations, odd sizes), both clients' displays offscreen
against the CPU reference (Windows: passed-through codes exact, mapped
+-1; Mac: EDR path against hdr.rs), and HDR10 clips (4:4:4 and 4:2:0) from
the Windows host role to a Mac client (VideoToolbox) and a Windows client
(software decoder) in test mode, with no screen, an SDR screen and an HDR
screen imagined. Still open: HDR capture on a real Mac with an HDR screen,
NVENC in HDR10 on an NVIDIA card, the HDR10 swapchain and the EDR layer on
real screens, moving the window between screens, cost and banding.

Clipboard
---------

Copied text goes in both directions: from the client to the host over the
input channel (9002), back over the video channel (9001); text up to
4 MB. Copied files and folders travel over the same channels, see the
next section. The same rule applies on every side - Mac or Windows, host
or client: whatever a program marks as confidential stays on the
computer where it was copied. On the Mac that is the marker
org.nspasteboard.ConcealedType (password managers such as 1Password or
KeePassXC), on Windows ExcludeClipboardContentFromMonitorProcessing or
"Clipboard Viewer Ignore" (KeePass, for example). The log then shows
"Zwischenablage: Eintrag ist als verdeckt markiert, nicht uebertragen"
(the entry is marked as concealed and was not transferred). So a
password cannot be copied across - that is intentional, and it applies
to files as well; on the Mac a single concealed entry is enough to hold
everything back. Of several text entries, only the first goes across on
the Mac. If there is a file list on the clipboard, no text goes out on
either side - not even the file name that Finder additionally puts
there as text.

Only what is copied during a session is sent; whatever was copied
before does not go across on connecting either. Without a counterpart
the client (Windows and Mac alike) does not read the clipboard at all,
and the Windows host likewise reads it only while a viewer is
connected - otherwise every copied password would show up in the log as
"verdeckt" (concealed) even without any connection. The Mac host, too,
reads the content only while a viewer is connected; without one it
merely keeps track of whether something has changed.

Whatever arrives is meant to end up in no history. On Windows it goes
neither into the clipboard history (Win+V) nor into the cloud clipboard,
and clipboard managers skip it. On the Mac - host and client alike - it
carries org.nspasteboard.TransientType and AutoGeneratedType, the markers
by which clipboard managers recognize transient content, and it stays on
this Mac only, not in Universal Clipboard for iPhone and iPad. This
applies to text as well as to received file lists.

Files via the clipboard
-----------------------

Files and folders are copied as usual - "Copy" in Explorer or in
Finder - and pasted on the other side. This works in both directions, between
the client (Windows or Mac) and any host (Mac or Windows host role),
over the existing encrypted connection, so only once the host has let
the client in. Unlike with RDP, the transfer starts as soon as you copy,
not only when you paste: the other side writes the files into a
directory of its own (see "Receive directory") and, once everything has
arrived, puts them on its clipboard as a file list - this replaces
whatever is on it at that moment. "Paste" in Explorer or Finder copies
them from there to the desired location. Cut works like copy: the source
stays where it is. If the clipboard on Windows is busy when the list is
put there, this is retried for about 2 s; if it fails, the transfer is
aborted (in the client "clipboard not available").

As with text, the clipboard is read only during a session; whatever was
copied before does not go across on connecting. A single copy often
triggers several clipboard notifications. On Windows (client and host
role) and in the Mac client, the clipboard is therefore read only once
it has been quiet for 150 ms, and the same file list goes out only once
within 2 s ("Zwischenablage: dieselbe Dateiliste noch einmal gemeldet -
uebergangen", the same file list was reported again and is skipped).
New content - text or other files - aborts a running send from this
side. If you copy received files again, they do not go back ("Dateien:
nicht gesendet, sie stammen aus einem Empfang", on the Mac host
"Dateien: nicht gesendet (stammen aus einem Empfang dieses Hosts)": not
sent because they come from a receive).

Right after connecting, the client often does not know yet whether the
host can handle files, and the input channel may not be up yet. A copy
then waits up to 5 s ("Dateien: N Eintraege vorgemerkt - die
Faehigkeiten des Hosts stehen noch aus (hoechstens 5 s)", N entries
queued while the host's capabilities are still pending) and goes out as
soon as the report is in. Likewise, the Windows host role holds a copy
back for up to 5 s until the viewer's input channel has reported what it
can do ("Dateien: Zuschauer meldet Dateien - die vorgemerkte Liste geht
hinaus", the viewer reports file support and the queued list goes out).
The Mac host queues nothing; without an input channel it writes
"Dateien: nicht gesendet (Zuschauer ohne Eingabekanal)" (not sent, the
viewer has no input channel).

Indicator (only in the client; the hosts write everything to the log): a
thin line overlaid at the bottom center of the picture, one per
direction, while the transfer is running and for 6 s afterwards:

    "Sending files: 3.1 of 12.4 MB"
    "Receiving files: 3.1 of 12.4 MB"
    "Files transferred: 2"                 sent and acknowledged
    "Files ready to paste: 2"              received and on the clipboard
    "File transfer aborted: <reason>"
    "Files not transferred: more than 4 GB or 10,000 items"
    "The other side cannot receive files yet."

The number is that of the top-level entries, i.e. of what was selected
when copying. The reason is "by this device", "by the other side",
"connection interrupted", "timeout, no progress", "not enough disk
space", "invalid data", "read error", "write error" or "clipboard not
available"; details are in protokoll.txt. Results are shown in cyan;
aborts, limits and "The other side cannot ..." (once per session) in
amber. "Files not transferred: ..." appears for each of the limits
below, even if only the entry list were over 1 MiB, and likewise when an
offer is rejected with acknowledgment 2 - in both directions.

Limits: at most 4 GiB (4295 MB) and 10,000 entries - files and folders -
per copy, and the entry list may be at most 1 MiB long. Beyond that
nothing goes out ("Dateien: nicht gesendet, zu gross (5368,7 MB,
hoechstens 4295,0 MB)" or "(mehr als 10000 Eintraege)" or "(Dateiliste
ueber 1048576 Byte)"; on the Mac host "Dateien: abgelehnt (mehr als 4 GB
oder 10000 Eintraege) - nichts gesendet" or "Dateien: abgelehnt (Liste
der Eintraege ueber 1 MiB) - nichts gesendet"). A path may be at most
1024 bytes long and 32 levels deep, a name 255 bytes. The receiver
accepts only if 1 GiB is still free afterwards (Windows and Mac host);
the Mac client does not check this in advance and aborts cleanly on a
write error.

Whatever the sender leaves out is logged with one line each, "Dateien:
uebersprungen (<was>): <Pfad>" (skipped, with the kind and the path):
links (symbolic links, on Windows also junctions - they are never
followed), special files such as FIFOs, names the other side would have
to reject ("\", not UTF-8, too long, too deep), and names a receiver
would see as identical: after the strictest sanitization (the Windows
one, see below), in NFC and ignoring case. Of such duplicates only the
first goes out; this also affects files with the same name from
different folders (for this the Mac host writes "Dateien: doppelter
Name <Name> - nur der erste wird gesendet", only the first one is sent).
Names go out in NFC; Finder often supplies them decomposed. A file goes
out only if, when opened, it is still the same as when it was listed
(Unix: device and inode, Windows: the final path); otherwise, and if it
is shorter than announced, the send aborts with a read error. If it has
grown, only the announced size goes out.

Low priority ("latency over bandwidth"): video, audio and input go
first.

    Window        At most 256 KiB are in flight unacknowledged, in
                  Gaming mode 64 KiB; switching Gaming mode takes effect
                  immediately on a running send. The Windows host role
                  always sends with at most 64 KiB: Windows cannot
                  measure what is in the kernel's send buffer
                  (256 KiB), and the small window makes up for that. It
                  costs throughput, at most 64 KiB per round trip - at a
                  20 ms round-trip time that is about 3.3 MB/s.
    Client        The input channel's writer thread first writes all
                  pending input (keys, mouse, settings), then at most
                  one file packet; there is never more than one waiting.
                  The input channel's send buffer is only 64 KiB: ahead
                  of a keystroke there are at most 64 KiB of file data
                  in the kernel. Acknowledgments are not deprioritized.
    Windows       A file packet enters the video channel's queue only if
    host role     no other one is waiting there and at most 128 KiB are
                  queued; acknowledgments bypass it as a small control
                  message.
    Mac host      Files, including the entry list, wait as long as more
                  than 128 KiB are in the video channel's send buffer;
                  the sender checks every 2 ms.
    Threads       Sending and receiving run in threads of their own with
                  lower priority: Windows "below normal", macOS QoS
                  "utility". The Mac host sends with "default" and
                  relative priority -15, because under "utility" macOS
                  turned a 2 ms wait into about 10 ms. The Mac client
                  sends under "utility"; macOS stretches deadlines and
                  sleeps considerably there (in the code's model 20 MB
                  in 4.1 instead of 1.1 s). How fast it really sends has
                  not been measured yet.

The entry list (up to 1 MiB) goes out as a single packet: before that it
waits like any file packet, but it cannot be split. On a thin link,
keystrokes or frames therefore wait behind it for a moment.

Abort: A send ends when new content is copied on its side (text or other
files); its end goes out before the new offer, and the client and the
Windows host role wait at most about 1.5 s for that. Every transfer ends
when the session ends or another viewer takes over, and when there is
no progress for 30 s (the sender gets no new acknowledgment, the
receiver no chunk). If the client loses the input channel during a send
to the host, it aborts immediately instead of only after 30 s
("Dateien: Eingabekanal N verloren - Sendung K abgebrochen", input
channel N lost, send K aborted); its end goes out on the new input
channel so that the host discards the half-filled directory at once (the
Mac host discards whatever came over the lost channel anyway).
Half-received data is deleted; aborted files have to be copied again. A
lost acknowledgment holds nothing up: the receiver in the client and in
the Windows host role repeats its state every second while idle.

Receive directory: Received files are stored in the user's temp folder,
never on the Desktop or in Documents or Downloads:

    Windows client       %TEMP%\QuadChroma-Ablage
    Mac client           $TMPDIR/QuadChroma-Ablage
    Windows host role    %TEMP%\QuadChroma-Host-Ablage
    Mac host             $TMPDIR/QuadChroma-Host-Ablage
 Client and host have separate folders so that neither clears away the
other's files when both run under the same user. On macOS the base
directory has permissions 0700. Each transfer gets a subdirectory
<unix-ms>-<kennung> (<kennung> is the transfer ID); while it is running,
the marker <unix-ms>-<kennung>.laeuft sits next to it. After each
complete receive the three newest transfers are kept (always including
the one just stored, even if the clock has jumped back); older ones are
deleted. At startup, whatever is older than 24 h is removed, as is
whatever an earlier run left half-received: the client and the Windows
host role write the process ID and start time into the marker and clear
away a transfer whose process is no longer alive (also at every cleanup
after that); the Mac host deletes every transfer with a marker at
startup. Running transfers are neither counted nor deleted, links are
never followed, and deletion happens only within the program's own base
directory. The log shows "Dateien: N alte Uebertragungsverzeichnisse beim
Start geloescht" (client), "Dateien: N Uebertragungen geloescht, aelter
als 24 h oder verwaist (<Basis>)" (Windows host role) or "Dateien: N
unfertige Uebertragung(en) eines frueheren Laufs geloescht" (Mac host),
each with the number N of transfers deleted. If the Mac host's base
directory is a link or belongs to another user, it cleans up nothing
("Dateien: Aufraeumen ausgelassen - ...", cleanup skipped).

Names at the receiver: it checks everything that arrives as if it were
hostile. The whole offer is rejected (acknowledgment 4, nothing is left
behind) for an empty path, "/" at the start, an empty component, "." or
"..", NUL or "\" in the path, paths that are too long or too deep, the
wrong order (a folder after its contents), invalid UTF-8, a wrong total
and names that are duplicates after sanitization. More than 10,000
entries or more than 4 GiB result in acknowledgment 2, and so does an
offer over 1 MiB at the client; at the hosts such an offer never
arrives, their input channel ends above that size without an
acknowledgment (see the upper limits below). Too little space results
in acknowledgment 3 (not at the Mac client, which does not check the
space in advance). Only what is not a valid name on this particular
system is sanitized:

    Windows   < > : " | ? * and control characters become "_", as do
              trailing dots and spaces; device names (CON, PRN, AUX,
              NUL, CONIN$, CONOUT$, COM0-9, LPT0-9), also with an
              extension such as con.txt and in any capitalization, get a
              "_" in front. Duplicate means: identical except for upper
              and lower case.
    Mac       Only control characters become "_", ":" stays. Duplicate
              means: identical after NFC and ignoring case, including ss
              and sharp s - the way APFS sees it. The Mac host creates
              the names in NFC.

Files are written only into the fresh transfer directory; every file is
newly created, and links are never created or followed.

Older peers: The other side states when connecting whether it can
handle files (capabilities, messages 11 and 69, see below). An older
version states nothing; then nothing goes out - an older host would
otherwise drop the input channel, since apart from text it accepts only
256 bytes per message there - and a notice appears:

    Client               once per session "The other side cannot
                         receive files yet.", in the log "Dateien: Host
                         kann keine Dateien empfangen (aelterer Host)"
    Windows host role    once per viewer, after 5 s: "Dateien: nicht
                         gesendet, der Eingabekanal des Zuschauers hat
                         in 5,0 s keine Faehigkeiten gemeldet" (without
                         an input channel "... stand nach 5,0 s noch
                         nicht"); if it reports capabilities without
                         files, "Dateien: Zuschauer kann keine Dateien
                         empfangen (aelterer Client)"
    Mac host             once per session "Dateien: Zuschauer kann
                         keine Dateien empfangen (aelterer Client)"

An older client simply ignores message 11.

On the Mac: If you copy files there - on the host as on the client -
from Desktop, Documents or Downloads, QuadChroma reads them from there,
and macOS may ask once whether QuadChroma may access that folder.
Without permission, reading fails; the log gives the reason. As of
macOS 15.4, even reading the clipboard can trigger a system prompt
(pasting from another app), for file references as well as for text.
Received files, on the other hand, never end up in these folders but in
the temp folder; Finder copies them from there when pasting.

Measured in the integration test of the final state (24 September 2026)
on the VM without a graphics card, with the Windows host role and the
client on the same machine, 1 GiB each, bit-identical:
- Client -> host: about 30 MB/s. The VM's software encoder took longer
  meanwhile: about 60 ms more latency and 2 frames per second fewer.
  The cause has not been determined; it is not the CPU load.
- Host -> client: 69 to 93 MB/s, without any measurable effect on
  picture and latency.
In both directions the host reported no congestion and no dropped frame.
In the LAN from the Windows client to the Mac host: 209.7 MB in 7.4 s,
i.e. 28 MB/s, at an unchanged rate of about 114 frames per second and
30 to 37 ms latency.

Log lines: in the client in protokoll.txt, in the Windows host role in
host-protokoll.txt, in the Mac host likewise (host-protokoll.txt in the
app folder; the stand-alone host /tmp/quadchroma-m1.log). These
read the same on all sides (sending, sent and acknowledged, receiving,
received and put on the clipboard, rejected, aborted, skipped, nothing
to send); only the reasons in parentheses differ:

    "Dateien: sende 3 Eintraege, 12,4 MB"    (hosts: "... an <IP>")
    "Dateien: gesendet und quittiert (12,4 MB in 1,8 s)"
    "Dateien: empfange 3 Eintraege, 12,4 MB"
    "Dateien: empfangen 3 Eintraege, 12,4 MB - in die Ablage gelegt"
    "Dateien: abgelehnt (<Grund>)"      before acceptance; at the sender
                                        e.g. "(Gegenseite: zu wenig
                                        Platz)"
    "Dateien: abgebrochen (<Grund>)"    after it, in the client e.g.
                                        "(hier abgebrochen)", "(Verbindung
                                        weg)", "(Gegenseite: abgebrochen)"
                                        or "(Zeitueberschreitung, kein
                                        Fortschritt)"
    "Dateien: uebersprungen (<was>): <Pfad>"
    "Dateien: nichts zu senden"

Additionally in the client and in the Windows host role (the third line:
acknowledgment N not sent because the path stayed full; the last two:
file list not readable, file list not put on the clipboard):

    "Dateien: nicht gesendet, zu gross (<Grund>)"
    "Dateien: nicht gesendet, sie stammen aus einem Empfang"
    "Dateien: Quittung N nicht gesendet, der Weg blieb voll (<Zustand>)"
    "Zwischenablage: dieselbe Dateiliste noch einmal gemeldet -
     uebergangen"
    "Zwischenablage: Dateiliste nicht lesbar, nichts uebertragen"
                                        (Windows)
    "Zwischenablage: Dateiliste nicht abgelegt (Ablage belegt oder
     Schreiben gescheitert, 40 Versuche in 1950 ms)"      (Windows)

The Windows host role collects its "Zwischenablage: ..." (clipboard)
lines in a queue of its own (see "Windows as host") and writes them to
host-protokoll.txt only in the five-second cycle. There they therefore
appear up to 5 s later than the "Dateien: ..." (files) lines they belong
to.

Only in the client (the first line: the capabilities the host reported;
the last one: a file reference that could not be resolved):

    "Host meldet Faehigkeiten 0x7: Dateien ja, Bildschirmwahl ja,
     HDR-Aushandlung ja"
    "Dateien: N Eintraege vorgemerkt - die Faehigkeiten des Hosts stehen
     noch aus (hoechstens 5 s)"
    "Dateien: Host kann keine Dateien empfangen (aelterer Host)"
    "Dateien: Eingabekanal N verloren - Sendung K abgebrochen"
    "Dateien: N alte Uebertragungsverzeichnisse beim Start geloescht"
    "Zwischenablage: Dateiverweis nicht aufloesbar, nichts uebertragen"
                                        (Mac client)

Only in the Windows host role (the first line: the capabilities the
viewer's input channel reported; the second: message T of N bytes
exceeded the limit of G bytes and the channel was closed):

    "Eingabekanal: Faehigkeiten 0x1 (Dateien)"
    "Eingabekanal: Nachricht T mit N Byte ueber der Grenze von G Byte -
     Kanal beendet"
    "Dateien: Zuschauer meldet Dateien - die vorgemerkte Liste geht
     hinaus"
    "Dateien: nicht gesendet, der Eingabekanal des Zuschauers hat in
     5,0 s keine Faehigkeiten gemeldet" (or "... stand nach 5,0 s noch
     nicht")
    "Dateien: Zuschauer kann keine Dateien empfangen (aelterer Client)"
    "Dateien: N Uebertragungen geloescht, aelter als 24 h oder verwaist
     (<Basis>)"

Only in the Mac host (the first line: the capabilities the client
reported; the last three: N file references detected on the Mac, N file
references from the client put on the clipboard, writing the file
references refused):

    "Eingabekanal: Client meldet Faehigkeiten 00000001 (Dateien)"
    "Dateien: Zuschauer kann keine Dateien empfangen (aelterer Client)"
    "Dateien: nicht gesendet (Zuschauer ohne Eingabekanal)"
    "Dateien: nicht gesendet (stammen aus einem Empfang dieses Hosts)"
    "Dateien: abgelehnt (mehr als 4 GB oder 10000 Eintraege) - nichts
     gesendet"
    "Dateien: abgelehnt (Liste der Eintraege ueber 1 MiB) - nichts
     gesendet"
    "Dateien: doppelter Name <Name> - nur der erste wird gesendet"
    "Dateien: N unfertige Uebertragung(en) eines frueheren Laufs
     geloescht"
    "Zwischenablage: N Dateiverweis(e) vom Mac erkannt"
    "Zwischenablage: N Dateiverweis(e) vom Client abgelegt"
    "Zwischenablage: Schreiben der Dateiverweise abgelehnt"

Wire messages (header as everywhere: u8 type, u8 flags, u16 unused,
u32 length; all numbers little endian):

    11  Capabilities  Host -> client, video channel: u32 bits (at least
                      4 bytes, further ones are ignored), bit 0 means
                      "files, version 1", bit 1 "display selection" (see
                      "Host display"), bit 2 "HDR negotiation" (see "HDR";
                      both hosts report 7). Goes to
                      every new viewer after the greeting, settings and
                      codec list; the display list (12) follows right
                      after it.
    69  Capabilities  Client -> host, input channel, same format; the
                      first message on every input channel. It applies
                      only to the channel that sent it.
    50  Offer         u32 ID (not 0), u32 count (1 to 10000), u64 total
                      (sum of the file sizes, exact), then per entry
                      u8 kind (0 file, 1 folder), u8 0, u16 path length
                      (1 to 1024), u64 size (folder 0), path (UTF-8,
                      relative, separator "/"). Ancestor before
                      descendant; at most 1 MiB.
    51  Chunk         u32 ID, u32 entry, u64 offset, 1 to 49152 bytes of
                      data; strictly in order, folders and empty files
                      skipped.
    52  End           u32 ID, u8 reason (0 complete, 1 aborted, 2 read
                      error, 3 timeout); at least 5 bytes.
    53  Ack           exactly 16 bytes: u32 ID, u8 state, u8 0, u16 0,
                      u64 received (data bytes written). State 0
                      running, 1 done and on the clipboard, 2 too large
                      or too many entries, 3 too little space,
                      4 invalid, 5 write error, 6 aborted at the
                      receiver. Anything other than 0 ends the transfer
                      on both sides.

50 to 52 go from the sender to the receiver (host -> client on the video
channel, client -> host on the input channel), 53 in the opposite
direction. Files are sent only to a peer that has reported bit 0 in this
session; a host requires the report from the viewer's current input
channel. When the viewer changes and at the end of the session, the
report no longer applies. Acknowledgments are sent right after
acceptance (state 0, received 0), at the latest after every 64 KiB of
written data, when nothing more is waiting, and at the end; the Mac host
also as soon as more than 16 KiB are outstanding. The receiver accepts
at most one window plus one chunk of unwritten data and 8 End messages.
Any deviation in the sequence is a protocol error (acknowledgment 4);
the channel stays open. On the hosts' input channel the following upper
limits apply per message; above them the channel ends as before:

    50 Offer              1 MiB
    51 Chunk              16 + 49152 bytes
    52, 53, 69            256 bytes
    48 Text               4 MiB
    all others            256 bytes

On the client's video channel the general limit of 64 MiB per message
still applies.

Acknowledgment 1 means, at the client and the Windows host role: the
file list is on the clipboard; if putting it there fails, 5 is sent
instead. The Mac host acknowledges 1 and writes "... - in die Ablage
gelegt" as soon as everything is written, and puts the list on the
clipboard on its main thread only right after that. If that fails, only
"Zwischenablage: Schreiben der Dateiverweise abgelehnt" appears in its
log, and the client still shows "Files transferred".

Benchmark
---------

The "Benchmark" tab runs through codecs, frame rates and bit rates in
sequence: which codecs (all that the host supports, each can be deselected),
60 and 120 frames/s, 10 to 150 Mbit/s, 3 to 15 seconds of measuring time per
step. A codec stays in place while its rates are run through - switching the
codec is the most expensive step. The picture keeps running meanwhile, and the
menu shows the progress; closing the menu cancels the run (ESC or F10). At the
end, host and client get back the codec and settings they had before.

What is measured is never a requested setting, only what the host has
confirmed. Per step: arrived frame rate, bit rate, the whole chain in
milliseconds (encoder, network, decoder, display), dropped frames, the host's
encoder time against its budget of 1000/fps, CPU load on both sides. A step
passes when at least 95 % of the target frame rate arrives, under 1 % is
dropped and the whole chain is at most 30 ms long - an absolute limit,
independent of the frame rate: measuring latency in frames penalizes high
frame rates, and 30 ms go unnoticed in remote control. The host's encoder time
is only shown, not judged (it is already part of the chain). The
recommendation is the best color quality that passes at the highest frame
rate, with the highest bit rate at which it still passes; "Apply" sets it and
saves it for this host. If not all rows fit into the table, the mouse wheel
scrolls it (three rows per notch, Page Up/Page Down likewise); a scroll bar
then appears on the right. During the run the table follows the newest row -
if you scroll yourself, it keeps your position until the run ends or you
scroll back to the end.

The "Test pattern" switch makes the host send a fixed, moving pattern instead
of the screen for the duration of the run (color bars, fine stripes, a
gradient with a circling square) - so every step sees the same content, and
nothing needs to run on the Mac. Without the test pattern, whatever is
currently happening on the Mac is measured; the steps are then only comparable
when something moves.

After every run the table is written to %APPDATA%\QuadChroma\benchmark.txt,
also after a cancellation. Without a window:

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --benchmark 5
    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --benchmark 5
                   --ohne-testbild
    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --benchmark 3
                   --benchmark-auswahl 0,3:25,50:120

(each one command line, wrapped here).

The number after --benchmark is the measuring time per step;
--benchmark-auswahl narrows the run down to candidates:Mbit:frame rates (empty
parts keep the default). Without a window there is no "Anzeige" link (the
display stage of the chain) and nothing that could be dropped - those columns
then show "-".

Test mode without a window, in case something is stuck:

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless

Prints a line every three seconds: frames received, frame rate, codec, stream
(width x height @ the host's frame rate, "?" without stream info), color (the
HDR state, see "HDR"; --hdr-schirm imagines a screen), decoder, delay, host
load, error. Without a connection the delay is replaced by "nicht
verbunden" (not connected); the error appears as the interface shows it, in
English with its key in front, for example 'Fehler Some("SessionTakenOver:
Another device has taken over the session.")', with the German details in the
log lines above it. It also prints every change of the decoder (which path,
and why not NVDEC, if so), the first frame of each decoder with size and
format, the pointer shape, and FFmpeg's own messages. The same goes to
%APPDATA%\QuadChroma\protokoll.txt, also in windowed mode - the file is
started afresh at every launch and additionally records the display there
(card, feature level, tearing) and, once per second, a line with frame rate,
display time, chain, dropped and skipped frames and the client's CPU load. A
connection error is recorded there with all details ("Verbindung: <Grund>",
i.e. connection: <reason>), but the same error only once as long as no frame
has arrived in between - so a host that is switched off does not appear every
2 s either. Errors that do not go away with the next attempt (a file damaged
or not writable, and every outcome of the access phase, see "Encryption and
access") end the attempts with "Verbindung zu <Adresse> beendet: der Fehler
bleibt bis zur Behebung - kein neuer Versuch" (connection ended, no new
attempt until the error is fixed). The start screen shows the error in the
interface language, with the system's wording, where there is one, in
parentheses after it.

When the host asks for access, test mode prints the access lines as well.
--passwort <password> answers the access phase once with that password (only
with --headless; a wrong one is not repeated, so as not to feed the host's
throttle); without it the client waits for "Allow" at the host ("Zugang: kein
--passwort - warte auf "Zulassen" am Host"). If the connection ends with a
message that stays, test mode ends with exit code 1 ("Verbindung beendet, die
Meldung bleibt - Ende des Pruefmodus"). Instead of an address, test mode also
takes a device ID (nine digits, or --id <ID>): it uses the last address from
hosts.txt, otherwise it waits up to 5 s for the ID's announcement ("ID <ID>
gefunden: <Adresse>") and else ends with exit code 1.

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --passwort k7m-4wq-9tz
    quadchroma.exe "581 729 911" --headless

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --decoder gpu
    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless --decoder integriert

forces that card and reports what it has to say about it;

    quadchroma.exe --decodertest

lists the cards and tries every decoder choice with HEVC 4:4:4, 4:2:0 and
H.264, without a connection.

    quadchroma.exe --shot datei.bmp [sprache] [ansicht[@BxH]]

writes a picture of the interface as BMP, without a window and without a
connection, and exits (defaults ui.bmp, de, start; the language as a code such
as en). Views: start, starttip (tooltip of the "Desktop shortcut" button),
startzeile (tooltip of a host row with its address), startfreigabe (the
button "Sharing is on", Windows only), abgeloest, fingerabdruck, veraltet,
abgelehnt, idfehlt, entfernt and freigabefehler (start screen with the
respective message: session taken over, a different device at the address,
older host version, refused, ID not found, device removed at the host,
sharing could not start), zugang, zugangfalsch, zugangwarten and zugangneu
(the access dialog: with "Allow" and code, wrong password, throttle
countdown, new identity at a known address), sitzung and nerd (statistics
over a mock picture), hud, hud2 to hud5 and hud2tip (the menu, one tab each;
hud is the "Picture" tab with a trailing display list), dateien and
dateienfehler (the file transfer lines, running and finished, or with abort
reasons). The start screens and the access dialog are 900x700, all others
1280x720; a suffix @BxH (width x height) on the view (such as
hud@1920x1080, 320 to 7680 per side) draws them at that size.

    quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --ohne-aud

leaves out the access unit delimiter (AUD) that the client otherwise adds to
every access unit for NVDEC: NVIDIA's parser releases a frame only when it
sees the start of the next one - without an AUD that costs one frame period of
decoder time. The switch is there for comparison; the log shows "NVDEC:
Zugriffseinheiten-Begrenzer angehaengt" (access unit delimiter added) when it
is not set. Likewise, --ohne-vui leaves out the VUI that the client otherwise
writes into every SPS for H.264 via NVDEC (max_num_reorder_frames 0 - the Mac
host encodes without reordering but does not say so in the SPS, and NVIDIA's
parser then holds back about 16 frames).

Windows as host
---------------

The same quadchroma.exe can also be the host: it accepts the viewer that the
Mac otherwise gets - same encryption, same access with password or "Allow",
same messages; a client notices no difference. Capture via Desktop
Duplication of the selected output, encoder via FFmpeg (hevc_nvenc/h264_nvenc
on NVIDIA; without NVIDIA only H.264 in software via Media Foundation), frame
pacing, codec switching, display selection with switching while running, test
pattern, audio (WASAPI loopback), pointer shape, load reporting and
keep-awake as on the Mac. Without a viewer the host does no work: no
Duplication, no encoder, no keep-awake (the capture thread only looks every
100 ms whether someone connected). The host role is part of the one app (see
"Windows: one app for both directions"): it runs in a thread of the app and
uses the app's icon; every line also goes to
%APPDATA%\QuadChroma\host-protokoll.txt (throttling and size cap: see the
paragraph on the hosts' logs above). Key, access and menu data are set up at
the start of the app ("Host-Rolle im Prozess der App"); capture, encoder
check, audio and input only when sharing is switched on for the first time.
If that fails, no port is opened, the status line of the menu says what
failed ("Sharing could not start: host.key or its folder cannot be
used.", "Sharing could not start: --konserve is not usable. Turn sharing
off and on to retry." or "Could not start sharing this PC."), and the
details are in host-protokoll.txt; switching sharing off and on again
tries the start once more.

The host-only process quadchroma.exe --nur-host (for a VM and for tests) runs
the host role alone, without window and client, with an icon of its own; its
tooltip is "QuadChroma - sharing this PC (ID 581 729 911)", and a click, left
or right, opens its menu:

    QuadChroma - <device name>
    Ready for connections      or "Connected: <name>", or "Port 9001 is
                               used by another program"
    Device ID: 581 729 911     a click copies the nine digits
    Password: k7m-4wq-9tz      a click copies it, marked as concealed
    Change password ...
    New random password
    Allowed devices >          as on the Mac, the date as YYYY-MM-DD
    Stop sharing

The same items of the one app's menu (see "Closing the window") behave the
same way.

"Copied" and "Password saved." appear as a balloon at the icon. "Change
password ..." opens a small window "Change password" with two password fields,
"OK" and "Cancel", and the same checks and answers as on the Mac (see "Mac:
one app for both directions"); "Remove all devices ..." asks in a Yes/No box
whose default is No. The Allow window is a small window of its own; it stays
on top, beeps and flashes in the taskbar, but does not take the focus (see
"Encryption and access"). "Start with Windows" (in the one app's menu)
installs the app into %ProgramFiles%\QuadChroma and creates the scheduled task
of the current account, "QuadChroma (<SID>)", for that copy (the exe with
--hintergrund, at that account's logon, run level HIGHEST, via schtasks.exe),
or deletes it; the check mark shows whether this account's task exists and is
enabled. Install, locking, versions, the earlier task "QuadChroma", standard
accounts and log lines: see "Windows: one app for both directions". A shortcut
of an earlier version in the Startup folder is replaced when the app starts,
but only if it starts this very exe; a shortcut to another copy stays ("Mit
Windows starten: die alte Verknuepfung startet <Pfad>, nicht diese exe - sie
bleibt, wie sie ist"), so a test or portable copy never takes over the
autostart. "Stop sharing" of the host-only process says goodbye to the viewer
(message 13, reason 1: "<Name> stopped sharing.") and ends it ("Freigabe
beendet (Infobereich)"). At logoff or shutdown, when an installer closes it
(Restart Manager) or another program sends WM_CLOSE to its hidden window, it
ends the same way with reason 0 ("Host-Rolle wird beendet (Abmelden)", "...
(Herunterfahren)", "... (ein Installationsprogramm schliesst die App (Restart
Manager))" or "... (WM_CLOSE von aussen)", then "Host-Rolle beendet"); both
wait at most 3 s for the viewer to take the goodbye. taskkill without /F does
not reach it (it has no visible window, so taskkill asks for /F); a hard end
(taskkill /F, Stop-Process) sends no goodbye. Menu and windows speak the
language set in the client (einstellungen.txt), otherwise the one of Windows,
and follow a change of it on the start screen at once ("Sprache der
Host-Rolle: <code>"; an Allow window already open keeps its language).

Without an icon - no Explorer, as over ssh or in session 0 - the host role
runs without a menu, and new devices get in only with the password
("Infobereich: kein Symbol (<Grund>) - ohne Oberflaeche, neue Geraete nur per
Passwort", in the one app "Host-Rolle in der App: Symbol der App steht (noch)
nicht - ..."); announcement and message 20 then do not offer "Allow" until the
icon is there. Only one host role runs per Windows session (mutex
Local\QuadChroma-Host, held by the one app while sharing is on): a second
--nur-host start ends at once with exit code 0 ("Die Freigabe laeuft in dieser
Sitzung schon (Local\QuadChroma-Host) - dieser Start endet."), before it
touches host-protokoll.txt; the one app then shows the port as taken and tries
again every 5 s. --list may run next to it. As long as the one app runs
(sharing on or off) it holds host-protokoll.txt (mutex
Local\QuadChroma-Host-Protokoll); --list and --nur-host then never start that
file afresh but write host-liste.txt or host-protokoll-nur-host.txt. If port
9001 is taken, the menu says so and the host role tries again every 5 s
("Bild-Port 9001 nicht verfuegbar: <Fehler> - neuer Versuch alle 5 s, das
Menue zeigt es", later "Port 9001 ist frei - Dienst laeuft"); --nur-host
without an icon ends with exit code 9 as before.

The host role keeps these lines apart from the client's: its card lines at
startup, FFmpeg's messages (from its encoder) and the "Zwischenablage: ..."
(clipboard) lines go into a queue of its own and from there into
host-protokoll.txt - the card lines and the encoder check right at startup,
later ones at the five-second interval. It does not write to protokoll.txt,
so client and host role in the one app keep their logs apart. One exception
remains: threads without an origin of their own count as the app's client -
the worker threads FFmpeg itself creates for the decoder that reads a
--konserve file write to the client's queue.

The switches below, like every switch of quadchroma.exe, need a terminal
started as administrator (see "Starting (Windows)" at the beginning).

    quadchroma.exe --host [port] [--output n] [--fps N] [--mbit N] [--fest]
                   [--konserve datei.hevc]
                   [--encoderweg bgra|yuv444|d3d11|auto]
    quadchroma.exe --nur-host [port] [the same switches]
    quadchroma.exe --list
    quadchroma.exe --messen [--output n] [--sekunden 10]

    --host [port]   the one app in the background with sharing on: video on
                    port (9001), input on port+1, announcement on port+2.
                    host.key and the access password are created on the
                    first start; the start line in host-protokoll.txt shows
                    device ID, name and fingerprint.
    --nur-host [port]   the host role alone, without window and client, with
                    an icon of its own (for a VM and for tests); the other
                    switches as with --host.
    --output n      output from the list of --list, as a request for this run
                    only (bildschirm.txt stays; a request from the client's
                    menu overrides it). If not given, bildschirm.txt applies,
                    otherwise the main display, which the host then follows.
                    Picture and mouse refer to the same output; its identifier
                    is remembered: if the output goes away, the host falls
                    back to the main display, and when it comes back, it
                    applies again (see "Host display"). The stream has the
                    output's full size in pixels (native, 3840x2160 and larger
                    included; Windows scaling such as 150 % does not change
                    it); with odd dimensions one pixel of border is dropped.
                    The one exception: while H.264 runs, an output larger
                    than its limit (4096 per side, 4096x2304) is fitted into
                    it, on the CPU (see "Stream size and H.264" under "Host
                    display"). There is no --out here: a smaller stream
                    needs a smaller display resolution on the host.
    --fps N, --mbit N, --fest   as on the Mac (defaults 120, 150, off).
    --konserve datei.hevc   an Annex B stream (HEVC or H.264) as the picture
                    source instead of capture, looped at the frame rate - the
                    test path without a card. The capability list then shows
                    exactly one entry, and a codec switch is refused. The
                    client writes such a file itself:
                        quadchroma.exe 192.168.178.194:9001 --headless
                                       --mitschnitt C:\qc\qc.hevc
                    (one command line, wrapped here).
    --encoderweg    how the picture gets into the encoder: bgra (BGRA directly
                    into NVENC, which converts on the card), yuv444 (own
                    conversion on the CPU), d3d11 (textures without a copy,
                    only for the 8-bit candidates via NVENC and only when the
                    output is connected to the NVIDIA card) or auto (default:
                    the decision from messung.txt, otherwise bgra). 10-bit
                    candidates, Media Foundation and rotated outputs always go
                    through the CPU; the host switches the source itself
                    ("Aufnahme: Quelle auf Prozessorweg umgestellt ..." or
                    "Null-Kopien-Weg: gedrehter Ausgang ... - Prozessorweg
                    (bgra)", i.e. switched to the CPU path). The size does
                    not matter: a 4K output takes the same paths as a smaller
                    one, zero-copy included - except while a stream is
                    fitted for H.264, which is scaled on the CPU ("Null-
                    Kopien-Weg: der fuer H.264 eingepasste Strom wird auf
                    dem Prozessor skaliert - Prozessorweg (bgra)").
    --list          cards, outputs (each with identifier, name and Hz) and
                    what this computer can encode (hevc_nvenc and h264_nvenc
                    per candidate via avcodec_open2; without an NVIDIA driver
                    it says "Cannot load nvcuda.dll"), plus whether the Media
                    Foundation encoders open and encode in software. H.264 is
                    also opened at its limit, 4096x2304 ("bis 4096x2304
                    geprueft - groessere Ausgaenge werden fuer H.264
                    eingepasst", checked up to 4096x2304). AV1 is
                    listed there without a probe as "nein (Protokoll und
                    Client kennen AV1 noch nicht)" (no, protocol and client do
                    not support AV1 yet).
    --messen        the measurement for capture: per output, at its full
                    size (the size of the stream), Acquire, copy on
                    the card, staging into main memory, nvenc from memory
                    (bgra, yuv444p) and, on the NVIDIA card, without a copy
                    from the texture, each with delay 0 and 2, plus a color
                    check (test pattern through nvenc and back) and a keyframe
                    check. Something must move on the output during the
                    measurement. Result in %APPDATA%\QuadChroma\messung.txt,
                    at the end one verdict per output ("Null-Kopien, 2,9 ms je
                    Bild" or "Prozessor, 5,1 ms, hoechstens 120 fps", i.e.
                    zero-copy or CPU path with the time per frame);
                    --encoderweg auto reads it. A messung.txt from an
                    earlier version may also list a "1920x1080 Ausschnitt"
                    (crop) line for 4K outputs, measured when the stream was
                    still halved there; auto ignores it and goes by the
                    full-size line - measure again for a current verdict.

The candidates are the same six as on the Mac. The desktop is 8 bit, so
"10 Bit" on Windows is always a conversion (noted in the capability list); the
start candidate is 0, otherwise the first one available. nvenc changes the bit
rate while running (without a restart, with a keyframe); a new frame rate or a
different encoder means a restart of the session with a keyframe. The host
manages keyframes itself: every 2*fps frames, in Gaming mode every fps frames,
plus on a codec switch and for a new viewer; under congestion only when an
encoded frame above the hard limit of 4 MB had to be dropped. After a codec
switch, a session restart, "Testbild aus" (test pattern switched off) and for
a new viewer, the host resubmits the last frame once, even without a fixed
frame rate ("Takt: letztes Bild nachgelegt (frischer Encoder)" or "(Testbild
aus)" or "(neuer Zuschauer)", i.e. last frame resubmitted because of a fresh
encoder, the test pattern being switched off or a new viewer), plus, without a
line of its own, a skipped final frame (see the congestion rule above);
otherwise, without a fixed frame rate, new frames only come when something
changes on the desktop.

The host runs with per-monitor DPI awareness: with Windows scaling (125 %,
150 %) it streams the real resolution of the display mode, 4K and larger
included, never halved ("Aufnahme gestartet: \\.\DISPLAY1 3840x2160 ...,
Strom 3840x2160 (nativ), Quelle Textur" or "... Quelle Prozessorweg"). The
first line in the log says whether this worked ("DPI-Awareness: ...").
Rotated outputs (portrait, 180 degrees, also portrait panels that Windows
runs in landscape, as on handhelds) are rotated by the host on the CPU;
the stream has the size of the desktop ("Aufnahme gestartet: ... gedreht N
Grad (Oberflaeche WxH, gedreht wird auf dem Prozessor)", i.e. capture
started, rotated by N degrees on the CPU). This costs some CPU time per
frame, --messen measures the unrotated surface there without the rotation,
and it has not yet been tested on real hardware.

Without NVIDIA (for example in a virtual machine) there is only "H.264 High"
via the Media Foundation software encoder (h264_mf), listed as software in the
capability list. By design it holds back 16 frames (about 300 ms at 60 frames
per second) - enough to test the whole chain Duplication -> encoder -> viewer,
not for real use. So that nothing gets stuck in it without a fixed frame rate
(the final frame of a movement, the first frame for a new viewer), the host,
one frame time after the last new frame, pushes the last frame in again at the
target rate until it has come out (counted as "nachgeschoben: n" in the 5-s
log, 16 per occasion); after that it stays quiet. Duplication needs the
console session; in an RDP session there is no DXGI output ("Duplication nicht
moeglich", i.e. Duplication not possible).

If the display goes away (mode change, UAC prompt, exclusive fullscreen), the
host reports "no display" to the viewer (message 9), retries every 2 s and
then forces a keyframe. The same loss appears only once in the log, and at the
end "Aufnahme laeuft wieder (derselbe Verlust hatte sich N-mal wiederholt)"
(capture running again, the same loss had repeated N times). After a loss the
host re-enumerates the outputs right away - often a monitor change is behind
it, and the host then follows the main display or its requested one (see "Host
display"). The pointer shape comes from Duplication (Windows pointers are
mostly 32x32; monochrome and masked shapes are converted, inverting pixels
approximated as opaque); the picture itself contains no pointer. Audio:
loopback of the default output device, mixed down to two channels, at the
device's rate; a silent playback stream in the same process keeps the loopback
running, and gaps are filled with silence. If the device is lost (unplugged,
format changed) or the default output device changes, the host reopens
whichever is then current, one attempt per second as long as someone is
watching ("Ton: <Grund> - Abgriff wird neu geoeffnet", then "Ton wieder
angemeldet: ..."); one to two seconds without audio pass in between. Without
an output device the host keeps running without audio and retries in the same
way ("Ton: ... - der Host laeuft ohne Ton, neuer Versuch alle 1000 ms, solange
jemand zuschaut"). If the same loss recurs before the device has run for 30 s,
it is only counted ("Ton: derselbe Verlust (...) noch N-mal, nicht einzeln
protokolliert").

A new viewer replaces the old one: the old one's queue is discarded; it only
gets the rest of the packet that is currently going out, and then message 10
(if it had only just connected, its greeting before that). As long as it keeps
taking data, the host waits, at most 15 s; if it takes nothing for 2 s, its
connection is cut. The new viewer is already running meanwhile. The log shows
"Zuschauer abgeloest: <IP>" (viewer replaced), followed, depending on the
state of the old one, by:

    "Abloesung an <IP> gemeldet"
                    (takeover reported) message 10 is in the kernel's
                    send buffer; that does not guarantee it arrives.
    "Abloesung an <IP> nicht zugestellt: <Fehler>"
                    (takeover not delivered) the old one was already
                    gone or did not take it within 1 s.
    "Abgeloester Zuschauer <IP> nimmt nichts mehr ab (nach N s) -
     Bildleitung gekappt"
                    (replaced viewer takes nothing, video connection
                    cut) it took nothing for 2 s, or the 15 s are up;
                    message 10 then does not reach it.

Usually only one of them appears. If the 15 s run out while message 10 is
still pending, "... gekappt" appears first and right after it "... nicht
zugestellt: <Fehler>".

The new viewer inherits nothing from the old one: a test pattern ends
("Testbild aus (Zuschauer gewechselt)", i.e. test pattern off because the
viewer changed), an active "no display" report is sent to it again, and the
host resubmits the last frame to it once, even with a still desktop ("Takt:
letztes Bild nachgelegt (neuer Zuschauer)"; with h264_mf it keeps pushing
until the frame has come out, see above).

Without message 10, the old client reconnects by itself as soon as it is
running again and takes over from the new one - like an older client.

Files via the clipboard also work in both directions with the host role (see
that section): copying in Explorer on the host sends them to the viewer,
provided its client supports files; what comes from the viewer is then placed
as a file list in the clipboard of the session in which the host role runs,
and pasting in Explorer copies it from %TEMP%\QuadChroma-Host-Ablage. The host
role sends with a fixed window of 64 KiB, holds back a copy made right after
connecting for up to 5 s until the viewer has reported its capabilities, and
cleans up its clipboard folder at startup.

Files of the Windows host role, in %APPDATA%\QuadChroma\: host.key (64 bytes:
private, then public; the device key, with which the client calls too),
host-devices.txt and host-password.txt in the same format as on the Mac (see
"Encryption and access"), bildschirm.txt with the requested display and
host-protokoll.txt - next to the client's hosts.txt.

Keys arrive over the connection as positions (macOS key codes) and are
translated into scancodes on Windows; the client's Command key becomes the
Windows key, its Option key Alt. On disconnect the host releases all held
keys. The app runs elevated (requireAdministrator, see "Windows: one app for
both directions"), so SendInput reaches windows with higher rights in the
user's session - Task Manager, the registry editor, installer windows. The one
window that stays out of reach is the real UAC consent prompt on the secure
desktop; that would need a SYSTEM service. While such a window is in front,
SendInput is refused: the host notes it once in the log ("Eingaben: SendInput
nimmt gerade nichts an ...") and sends the viewer a short status (message 9
with 2), so the viewer shows "A window on the Windows PC needs Windows' own
confirmation - control is not possible there for a moment." (at most once
every few seconds); when input flows again the status is taken back (message
9 with 3). At the start the host logs the right level once ("Rechte:
erhoeht", or "Rechte: normal - SendInput erreicht keine Fenster mit hoeheren
Rechten" for a portable build without the manifest); it never relaunches
itself.

The client's test mode shows every host that announces itself on the network
once, as a line "Host gefunden: <Name> (<Adresse>, ID <ID>, Zulassen
moeglich)" (host found: name, address, device ID or "-", and whether "Allow"
is possible there; that part only if it is).

The files next to the executable belong to it and must be copied along:
avcodec-63.dll and avutil-61.dll. These are libraries of the FFmpeg project
under the LGPLv2.1, included as separate files and replaceable. They are built
with scripts/build-ffmpeg-windows.sh from the unmodified FFmpeg 9.0.2 without
external libraries; the sources are attached to every release, and details and
all license texts are in THIRD_PARTY_NOTICES.txt. Direct3D, DXGI and the
shader compiler (d3dcompiler_47.dll) are parts of Windows; none of them is
shipped.

Requirement: Windows 10 or 11, 64-bit. No Visual C++ runtime is needed: the C
runtime is inside the exe, and the FFmpeg files use only the Universal C
Runtime, which is part of Windows 10 and 11.

As of: 28 September 2026
